This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000920 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR AFGHANISTAN COORDINATOR TAYLOR, SA, EUR/SE, EUR/RPM 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU AF
SUBJECT: AFGHANISTAN:  TURKS NEARING DECISION ON PRTS; 
INABILITY TO FOLLOW THROUGH ON OUR COMMITMENT ON TU HELOS 
FOR ISAF MAY IMPACT FUTURE TU CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch.  Reasons:  1.5 (B and 
D). 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) MFA and TGS agree in principle that Turkey should lead 
a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Afghanistan.  They 
intend to finalize their discussions by February 18 and seek 
the Prime Minister's backing (both political and financial) 
for Turkey to lead a PRT.  If the PM concurs, the GOT intends 
to approach us to discuss desired location of the PRT and 
when Turkey may be able to stand it up.  While their focus 
remains on PRTs, the MFA and TGS continue to discuss in 
general terms whether Turkey should increase its contribution 
to ISAF and/or contribute to OEF operations.  At the same 
time, however, our contacts have cautioned us that the USG's 
inability to follow through on its commitment to take care of 
the airlift required to transport the Turkish helicopters to 
Afghanistan for ISAF may adversely impact Turkey's 
willingness to do more in Afghanistan.  The GOT remains 
interested in holding consultations in Ankara with 
Afghanistan Coordinator Taylor and has proposed three 
alternative dates in mid-March.  We request a response.  End 
summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) During a February 13 meeting, MFA DDG for South Asian 
Affairs Aydin Evergin offered to deputy pol-mil counselor the 
following information on Afghanistan-related issues: 
 
 
----------------- 
DEFENSE INFORMALS 
----------------- 
 
 
--Minister of Defense Gonul told SECDEF and the other Allies 
during the Defense Informals earlier this month in Germany 
that Turkey was considering making a contribution to 
Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) in Afghanistan, 
including possibly leading one.  The press reports after the 
Informals (which reported that Turkey had announced it would 
lead a PRT) "were wrong." 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
PRTS:  TURKEY CLOSE TO A DECISION 
--------------------------------- 
 
 
--On February 18, the MFA, TGS and other Turkish agencies 
will meet to finalize their deliberations on whether Turkey 
should lead a PRT.  The expected result:  a recommendation to 
the Prime Minister that he back (both politically and 
financially) Turkey leading a PRT.  TGS tells the MFA that it 
does not have the resources in its current operating budget 
to finance a PRT. 
 
 
--If the PM concurs, the GOT will approach us to discuss 
desired location of a Turkish-led PRT and when the Turks 
might be able to stand up the PRT.  (The MFA and TGS have 
some proposed locations in mind, but when pressed, Evergin 
declined to discuss specifics.)  The MFA and TGS also want to 
send a team to Afghanistan to observe existing US-led PRTs 
and to "pick the brains" of US personnel assigned there. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
TURKISH HELICOPTERS FOR ISAF 
---------------------------- 
 
 
--The Turkish military is anxious to resolve the issue of who 
will provide the airlift for the three helicopters that 
Turkey has offered to backfill ISAF requirements.  NATO is 
pressing the Turks to send the helicopters. 
 
 
--US military officials told their Turkish counterparts the 
US would provide the airlift.  (Note:  this may be a 
reference to a statement made by VCJCS GEN. Pace during his 
early December visit to Ankara, when he told TGS D/CHOD GEN. 
Basbug "you provide the helos, we will take care of the 
lift."  After deputy pol-mil counselor's discussion with the 
MFA's Evergin, MFA and MOD officials claimed to the DATT that 
SECDEF had told MOD Gonul at the December NATO Informal that 
Turkey would not have to pay for the airlift for the Turkish 
helos to ISAF.   The Turkish officials went on to say that 
they recommended to TGS and MFA that the GOT support the helo 
request based on that understanding.  End note.) 
 
 
--The GOT believes it has done its part by responding 
positively to the USG's request and offering the helicopters. 
 It is now waiting for the US to do its part. 
 
 
--The Turkish military is not pleased with recent suggestions 
by some Allies that Turkey now provide its own lift. 
 
 
--The USG's apparent inability to follow through on its 
commitment on the airlift may impact adversely the GOT's 
decision whether to make further contributions to 
Afghanistan.  (Note:  MFA and MND officials told DATT 
separately that the MFA and MND are prepared to recommend 
that Turkey lead a PRT if the ISAF helo airlift support issue 
can be resolved to Turkey's satisfaction.  End note.) 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
OTHER POSSIBLE TURKISH CONTRIBUTIONS 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
--Turks are aware the US and NATO are interested in having 
Turkey do more in Afghanistan. 
 
 
--The MFA and TGS are discussing in general terms whether 
Turkey can or should do more in the way of support for OEF or 
ISAF.  Turkey's present focus is on PRTs. 
 
 
--Turkey is not clear on the US priority in Afghanistan.  Is 
it PRTs?  OEF?  ISAF? 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
CONSULTATIONS WITH AMBASSADOR TAYLOR 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
--The GOT remains interested in convening formal 
consultations in Ankara with Afghanistan Coordinator Taylor. 
 
 
--Turks would like to discuss the following issues:  OEF, 
ISAF, PRTs, reconstruction, political/economic developments 
in Afghanistan, Bonn meeting.  It is especially important to 
have the "right" US military officials accompany Ambassador 
Taylor to discuss PRT, OEF and ISAF operations in detail and 
to answer any questions/address any concerns the Turkish 
military may have. 
 
 
--In response to the request from the US for acceptable dates 
in mid-March, the MFA proposes the following dates: March 11, 
12, or 19. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Action request:  we request that the Department advise 
when Ambassador Taylor might be able to travel to Ankara for 
consultations. 
EDELMAN