This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  CARACAS 000425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR TSHANNON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
USAID DCHA/OTI FOR RPORTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL VE
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS STRATEGY FOR VENEZUELA 
 
REF: A) STATE 11875 B) 2003 STATE 333935 
 
------------------------------------ 
POLITICAL AND HUMAN RIGHTS LANDSCAPE 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶1. Venezuela continued to be embroiled in a political crisis 
over the government of President Hugo Chavez, who was elected 
in July 2000 in generally free and fair elections.  The 
democratic environment suffered from deteriorating rule of 
law and weakened institutions that were increasingly 
subordinated to political interests.  Respect for political 
rights continued to be of special concern as opposition 
groups petitioned the National Electoral Commission (CNE) to 
convoke a recall referendum on President Chavez' rule.  The 
Government's human rights record remained poor.  Political 
violence and intimidation against opposition political 
parties, the media, labor groups, the courts, the Catholic 
Church, and human rights groups was common, often carried out 
by government sympathizers inspired by the rhetoric of the 
President and other government officials.  The police and 
military continued to commit numerous abuses, including 
extra-judicial killings of criminal suspects.  Arbitrary 
arrests, detentions and torture of detainees persisted. 
Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. 
Impunity, one of the country's most severe human rights 
problems, allowed corruption and extreme inefficiency to 
flourish in the judicial system.  Child labor increased as 
economic conditions worsened, and violence against women and 
children remained problems. 
 
----------------- 
OUR 2003 STRATEGY 
----------------- 
 
¶2. The embassy focused its 2003 democracy and human rights 
efforts on support for political rights, while it continued 
conducting programs to fight other human rights abuses.  The 
Ambassador and every section/agency used contact and 
representational work to encourage the implementation of OAS 
Resolution 833 which calls for a constitutional, democratic, 
peaceful, and electoral solution to the country's political 
crisis.  In addition, embassy programs worked to strengthen 
Venezuelan institutions, encourage communication and 
dialogue, and oppose violence and extra-constitutional 
changes in government.  The embassy conducted programs that 
can influence human rights practices through a variety of 
sections including the Public Affairs (PAS), Political, and 
Consular Sections, the Legal Attache Office (LEGATT), and the 
OTI office of the Agency for International Development 
(USAID). 
 
------ 
ACTION 
------ 
 
¶3. To increase professionalism and lower the likelihood of 
extra-judicial killings and torture committed by the security 
forces, LEGATT, in conjunction with PAS and the Narcotics 
Affairs Section (NAS), arranged several training programs for 
law enforcement officials that incorporated rule of law and 
human rights concepts.  During the second half of 2003, 
LEGATT sent six Venezuelan officers to a 10-day seminar in 
the US on counter-terrorism; one officer to a three-month 
leadership course at the FBI Academy; and three officers each 
to the FBI's terrorism and police management training and 
"Latin American Law Enforcement Executive Development 
Seminar," respectively.  LEGATT also organized a two-week 
course on terrorism crime scene investigations for 50 
participants and a one-week anti-kidnap seminar for 40 
participants. 
 
¶4. In compliance with the Leahy Amendment, the Political and 
Economic Sections, DAO and LEGATT worked to vet military 
units and law enforcement personnel for training and 
assistance to ensure that the beneficiaries of US assistance 
have not committed human rights abuses.  The Political 
Section's human rights officer also meets regularly with 
contacts in the private sector and within the government to 
foster support for human rights and track significant areas 
of concern. 
 
¶5. The mission's efforts to promote democracy, rule of law, 
and political rights continued to be quite strong.  The 
 
USAID/OTI office funded National Democratic Institute (NDI) 
activities to promote transparency in the electoral process 
through domestic observation.  To accomplish this objective, 
NDI is working with a consortium of civil society groups 
spanning the political spectrum to provide quality control in 
the electoral process, including administrative procedures 
and media reporting.  The OTI also funded the International 
Republican Institute (IRI) to provide training to political 
parties in 1) execution of electoral campaigns with emphasis 
on developing campaign strategies and communicating party 
platforms effectively to voters; and 2) observation of 
electoral processes, focused on assessment, reporting, and 
establishment of a volunteer trainer network.  In addition, 
the OTI funded the Carter Center's continuing mediation and 
electoral process observation efforts. 
 
¶6. Complementing OTI activities, the mission ensured that all 
press statements and speeches by the Ambassador, the DCM, and 
visiting USG officials, including Members of Congress, 
contained references to our strong support for OAS Resolution 
833 as the way out of Venezuela's political crisis.  In 
addition, post ensured wide distribution of relevant remarks 
by Washington policymakers and OAS officials to the media and 
placed them on the embassy website.  The mission also 
arranged a digital video conference (DVC) on the California 
gubernatorial referendum, during which the Venezuela 
referendum was discussed in detail. 
 
¶7. To improve the country's judicial system, the Public 
Affairs Section (PAS) conducted several programs to 
strengthen the administration of justice and prevent abuses. 
PAS organized a DVC on judicial ethics and sponsored five 
expert speakers on various aspects of the administration of 
justice.  PAS also sponsored a one-week workshop on 
"Mediation and Conflict Resolution in Prisons" conducted by 
an expert trainer in conflict resolution.  The participants, 
representing all sectors of the judicial and penal systems, 
used their workshop experience to create a network for 
continuing professional collaboration.  In late 2003, PAS 
arranged an additional expert speaker on victim protection 
and funded an International Visitor Program on "Human Rights 
and Prison Reform."  A DVC on the country's human rights 
situation is planned for early 2004. 
 
¶8. To strengthen civil society and democratic institutions, 
the mission approved $718,500 of USAID/OTI funding for 14 
grants in the following program areas: justice/human rights, 
transparency in government, media/freedom of expression, 
conflict management, and community impact activities 
(dialogue among polarized groups).  For example, one project 
was designed to raise public awareness of and respect for 
human rights.  It accomplished the goal by conducting human 
rights workshops for leaders of key societal sectors and by 
distributing written explanations nationwide of the main 
national and international mechanisms for protection of human 
rights.  Another grant promoted democratic discussion between 
government and opposition parties in the National Assembly on 
topics such as freedom of expression.  The discussions were 
facilitated by an international expert. 
 
¶9. Especially relevant due to the standoff between the 
government and private media were embassy efforts to support 
a free and democratic press.  The Ambassador hosted a Press 
Freedom Day event to highlight the importance of free speech. 
 That message was backed up by USAID/OTI grants that 
emphasized the importance of an impartial media, allowing all 
candidates to have air time during elections, media 
regulatory systems, and the need to allow for democratic 
coexistence among those with opposing viewpoints.  In 
conjunction with  OTI, PAS arranged a DVC on the role of the 
media in a democracy for pro-government and opposition 
affiliated journalists.  The mission issued many press 
statements in suport of freedom of expression and against the 
use of violence by any party for political ends. 
 
¶10. To assist women's efforts to overcome discrimination and 
violence, the mission co-sponsored with Vital Voices Global 
Partnership a kickoff workshop for women who are business and 
community leaders.  The Vital Voices worldwide network helps 
women organize themselves to address a range of issues, 
including leadership training, coalition building, and the 
fight against trafficking in women and children.  The mission 
also co-sponsored a one-day conference on proposed changes to 
the Domestic Violence Law that would reduce protective 
 
measures available to battered women and children. 
Conference participants produced a written argument (amicus 
brief) against the proposed change and presented it to the 
Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court. 
 
¶11. The Consular Section works with local immigration offices 
to strengthen immigration controls and prevent human 
smuggling and trafficking in persons.  In 2003, the section 
hosted one DHS Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services 
officer who trained 300 employees from airlines, airport 
security, and the immigration/passport agency in fraud 
detection. 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN