This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR SP
SUBJECT: SPANISH DELEGATES TO ICAO'S MEETING IN CAIRO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 35954 
 
¶1.  We met with Susana Espana, International Relations 
Advisor for Civil Aviation at the Ministry of Public Works, 
regarding reftel.  She informed us that the following Spanish 
officials from Civil Aviation, Ministry of Public Works, will 
attend the ICAO meeting in Cairo: 
 
-Manuel Menderoz, Head of Air Transport Promotion and 
Development 
 
-Ricardo Fernandez, Head of Aeronautic Legislation Services 
 
-Maria Asuncion Cornejo, Technical Advisor on Aeronautic 
Legislation 
 
-Amelia Cotelo, Head of the Air Transport Facilitation Section 
 
¶2.  No information about GOS positions on the agenda items is 
yet available.  However, Ms. Espana noted that the GOS 
submitted a proposal before the European Civil Aviation 
Conference (ECAC) to harmonize standards for serving 
Passengers with Reduced Mobility (PRM), which could relate to 
Cairo's Agenda Items 5 and 7.  She explained that while Spain 
attempts to make its airports and airlines more accessible 
for PRMs, allocation of resources required to provide related 
services and enhance infrastructure may negatively impact 
competitiveness for Spanish airports and airlines.  She said 
that the proposal is to be considered further in the 
Facilitation Subgroup of ECAC in preparation for the 35th 
Session of the ICAO Assembly this September. 
 
¶3.  We will provide additional information regarding 
attendance and GOS thinking on the Cairo agenda items as it 
becomes available. 
MANZANARES