This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: GERMAN OPPOSITION LEADER PROPOSES EU-TURKEY 
"PARTNERSHIP" DURING VISIT 
 
REF: ANKARA 581 
 
 
Classified by Polcouns John Kunstadter; reasons 1.5 b and d. 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: German opposition CDU-CSU leaders told PM 
Erdogan and other GOT officials during a visit to Turkey that 
they favor a "privileged partnership" between the EU and 
Turkey over full Turkish membership.  Erdogan rejected the 
idea, but maintained a positive tone during discussions.  A 
German Embassy contact noted that EU Expansion Commissioner 
Verheugen, who is close to German PM Schroeder, also rejected 
the partnership concept.  The contact said Schroeder will 
show strong support for Turkey's EU candidacy during his 
upcoming visit.  End Summary. 
 
 
------------------- 
Three German Visits 
------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) German CDU-CSU opposition leaders Angela Merkel and 
Wolfgang Schauble met with PM Erdogan, MPs from the ruling AK 
Party, and others during a February 15-17 visit to Turkey. 
The visit from two of Germany's leading Turkey-sceptics came 
between a more positive January visit by German FM Fischer 
(reftel) and a pending February 22-24 trip by PM Schroeder, 
during which the PM is expected to show strong support for 
Turkey's EU candidacy. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
Merkel, Erdogan Stick to Guns 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Thomas Bagger, political and press counselor at the 
German Embassy in Ankara, told us February 18 that both the 
GOT and the German opposition leaders maintained their 
long-held positions on Turkey's EU candidacy during the 
visit, and both sides accomplished their political goals. 
Merkel made it clear that she favors a "privileged 
partnership" between the EU and Turkey over full Turkish 
membership.  Erdogan made clear his view that such an option 
is "not on the agenda," and emphasized that Turkey expects 
its reform efforts to lead to full EU accession.  However, 
both sides kept the tone of the meetings positive, and tried 
to emphasize areas of agreement wherever possible.  Bagger 
said this was important for Erdogan, who has defined AK as a 
"conservative democratic" party and needs CDU support to 
develop ties with conservative parties in Europe.  In 
addition, the GOT knows it will need CDU support at some 
point during its quest to join the EU.  Merkel, for her part, 
wants to chart a middle course between hard-line CDU 
opponents of Turkish membership and the few CDU members who 
favor Turkey's EU accession. 
 
 
--------------------------- 
Both Sides Keep Tone Upbeat 
--------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Bagger said Erdogan emphasized with Merkel and 
Schauble that Turkey is seeking only a negotiating date -- 
actual accession is years away and need not be discussed now. 
 Bagger opined that this is a wise departure from the past 
GOT tendency of outlining a time frame for full EU accession. 
 Merkel praised the GOT for passing extensive EU-related 
human rights reforms, and said she wants to encourage the 
reform process.  Schauble, generally more critical of Turkey 
than Merkel, let Merkel take the lead during the visit, 
Bagger said. 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Merkel: Partnership Could Be Best Option 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (U) During a joint press conference, a reporter asked 
Merkel what position CDU would take if the EU begins 
accession negotiations with Turkey in late 2004 or early 
2005, and CDU subsequently enters the government.  Merkel 
replied that CDU would support the negotiations, but she 
rejected the idea that the talks would automatically lead to 
full membership for Turkey.  She averred that both sides 
should be open to the possibility that a "privileged 
partnership" will turn out to be the best option for all 
parties. 
---------------------------------- 
Schroeder Will Show Strong Support 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Bagger said the German Government is preparing a much 
more positive visit by PM Schroeder.  He noted that EU 
Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen, who is very close to 
Schroeder, told reporters February 17 that he rejected 
Merkel's call for a "privileged partnership."  In addition, 
Schroeder and other German officials have recently said 
publicly that they expect the October EU Commission report on 
Turkey to be positive. 
¶7. (U) MFA officials knowledgeable about the Merkel visit 
were not available due to the preparations for the pending 
Schroeder visit.  We will therefore report septel on the 
MFA's views of the Merkel visit. 
 
 
 
 
EDELMAN