This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR AND NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AMGT
SUBJECT:  MESSAGE FROM HIS MAJESTY KING HAMAD BIN ISSA AL 
KHALIFA, KING OF THE KINGDOM OF BAHRAIN TO MR. GEORGE W. 
BUSH, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
On February 25, 2004, post received the following diplomatic 
note from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which enclosed a 
letter from the office of the King of the Kingdom of 
Bahrain. 
 
Begin text of the diplomatic note: 
 
Kingdom of Bahrain 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
Ref: 16/2/6-10763 
Dated 2/23/2004 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America in the Kingdom, and has the pleasure to enclose a 
letter from His Majesty King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa, King 
of the Kingdom of Bahrain, to His Excellency President 
George W. Bush, President of the United States of America. 
 
The Ministry requests that the Embassy would secure the 
delivery of the attached letter to the concerned authority. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
takes this opportunity to renew to the Embassy the assurance 
of its highest consideration. 
 
End text of diplomatic note. 
 
Begin text of the letter: 
 
14 February 2004 
 
His Excellency Mr. George W. Bush 
President, 
United States of America 
 
Your Excellency, 
 
I wish to thank your Excellency and the people of the United 
States of America for your kind message and felicitations on 
the advent of Eid-Al-Adha. 
 
It is my sincere desire to maintain and further enhance the 
friendly relations existing between our two countries to 
encompass all fields of cooperation. 
 
Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest esteem. 
 
 
Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa 
King of Bahrain 
 
End text of letter. 
 
(U) Post sent the original letter via Unclassified Pouch, 
registration #3882709, on February 29 to NEA/ARP (Claire 
Kaneshiro) to deliver to S/ES-CR 
 
 
 
FORD