This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AFIN SNAR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY 2003 END USE MONITORING REPORT 
 
 
REF: STATE 741 
 
 
---------- 
Overview 
---------- 
 
 
¶1.  Since 1986, the International Narcotics Crime and Control 
(INCC) program has provided approximately 5,500 units of 
equipment and training, valued at over USD 5.7 million, to 
five Turkish agencies with responsibility for Turkey,s 
anti-narcotics programs: The Turkish Grain Board (TMO), 
Jandarma (paramilitary police under the Minister of the 
Interior), Customs, Turkish National Police (TNP), and the 
Amatem drug addiction treatment facility. During calendar 
year 2003, training and equipment valued at some USD 173,000 
was provided. Very generally, the equipment provided during 
these years can be assigned to the following categories: 
Computers; communications; surveillance; border inspection; 
and poppy processing. However, because of the number and 
types of equipment provided, to report by type of resource 
rather than by project, as requested in Reftel, is not 
practicable. (For example, while computers have been provided 
to all five agencies, they serve completely different 
functions in each agency.) 
 
 
¶2.  Similarly, because this equipment has been assigned to 
scores of locations throughout the country, physical 
inspection of all the equipment is a practical impossibility. 
Thus, Post relies upon periodic meetings with supervisory 
personnel in each agency to monitor its use. (It appears that 
all agencies maintain up-to-date physical inventories.) Where 
feasible, Post does, in connection with such meetings, also 
physically inspect some equipment. (This year, such 
inspections were performed on equipment provided to TMO and 
Amatem.) Local agency personnel have been uniformly 
cooperative and helpful with respect to such end-use 
monitoring. 
 
 
¶3.    Because of Turkey,s refusal to accept Leahy Amendment 
language contained in the year 2000 Letter of Agreement, the 
INCC program has been winding down. Unobligated funds from 
1999 and prior years in the amount of $122,587 are expected 
to be obligated before year end 2004, at which point the 
program will suspend. Post is attempting to persuade the 
current GOT to accept the disputed Leahy Amendment language, 
in which case -- funds permitting -- it might be possible to 
restart the program. Our local partners have made many 
requests for additional training and equipment, and 
resumption of the program will be of great value to Turkey,s 
anti-narcotics efforts. 
 
 
¶4.    Two major lessons emerge from Post,s experience with 
the program. First, the existing method of funding, under 
which a predetermined amount (USD 500,000) was allocated 
among each agency without regard to their needs, is 
suboptimal. Should the program be revived, when agencies seek 
funding they should specify the strategic goals to be 
achieved, and should also suggest benchmarks against which 
the success of the program and utility of the equipment and 
training provided can be measured. Second, the choice of make 
and model of equipment should always be made in close 
consultation with the agencies, to ensure that it is suited 
to their needs and local conditions. 
 
 
---------- 
Turkish Grain Board 
---------- 
 
 
¶5.  Starting in 1992 and continuing through 2001, the INCC 
program provided TMO with equipment and training valued at 
over USD 900,000. No items were provided in 2003. All of the 
equipment is still being used. The objectives of this program 
are to reduce cost, increase the morphine content of 
cultivated poppies, and reduce the amount of land under 
cultivation. All of these objectives are being achieved: 
Poppy capsule morphine content has doubled since the program 
started, while the cost of morphine base has declined from 
$665 per kilo in 1998, to $450 today. TMO hopes to reduce 
land under cultivation by 50% in the next year (from 149,000 
hectares to 70,000), while again doubling productivity. 
During a meeting on January 19 with TMO facility manager Sen 
Huseyin and two other TMO officials, Econoff was advised that 
the following equipment (all of which Econoff inspected 
during the visit) has been of greatest value to TMO: 
 
 
      a.    A pilot facility placed into operation in April 
2003 (purchased with funds obligated during 2001) will be 
fully operational in 2004. This facility will be used to 
develop new methods of determining the alkaloid content of 
poppy seeds. Mr. Huseyin reported that the U.S.-built 
equipment purchased through the INCC program is superior to 
the domestic equipment it replaced. 
 
 
b.    Seed Cleaning Equipment (SCE, also purchased with funds 
obligated during 2001). TMO has begun to cultivate its own 
poppy plant varieties, which have 2-3 times the morphine 
content of the plants currently grown by the 100,000 
commercial poppy farmers who supply poppy capsules to TMO. 
The SCE cleans, disinfects and packages the seeds of these 
new varieties, so that TMO can distribute them to farmers. 
This coming year, some 800 tons of seeds will be distributed 
in this manner. Huseyin reported that this process would be 
quite impossible without the SCE. While TMO is quite happy 
with the equipment, it does not have the ability to separate 
seeds according to color. Apparently, the market for 
comestible poppy seeds (a potential by-product of morphine 
production and additional source of income to TMO), requires 
seeds to be sold according to color. TMO has heard that 
equipment exists that permits such separation, and has asked 
Post to fund its purchase. 
 
 
c.    High pressure liquid chromatographer (HPLC) and 
computer (purchased with funds obligated during 1999). This 
equipment measures the morphine content of the morphine base 
manufactured at the facility, and is used both for research 
and for quality control. TMO had some small compatibility 
problems in the beginning (U.S. vs. European standards), but 
they have now been corrected and TMO is very happy with this 
equipment. TMO has asked Post to fund the purchase of a 
second HPLC unit, to use as a backup. 
 
 
---------- 
Jandarma 
---------- 
 
 
¶6.  Starting in 1993 and continuing through 2003, the INCC 
program delivered to Jandarma training and equipment valued 
at over USD 1.2 million. In 2003, the INCC program delivered 
five laptop computers, valued at USD 12,250. On January 15, 
Econoff met with Yildirim Cengiz, Department Head, Smuggling 
and Organized Crimes, and two other Jandarma officials, to 
discuss the program. While the value of equipment delivered 
is large, Cengiz described the equipment as being &bits and 
pieces,8 which is insufficient to carry out a 
&substantial8 project, and opined that the piece-meal way 
in which equipment was purchased did not fully meet 
Jandarma,s needs (see paragraph 4, above). Cengiz suggested 
a coordinated approach, in which Jandarma,s &real needs8 
are met. The most useful items purchased have been the 
above-mentioned laptops, cameras and radios. Jandarma is 
currently in need of long-distance surveillance equipment, 
which Cengiz asked Post to fund. 
 
 
¶7.  Cengiz also described a number of problems arising out of 
the &Buy America8 policy. He noted that the technical 
specifications of European equipment are different from those 
of U.S. equipment, and offered as examples the purchase of 
video recorders whose tapes won,t play on PAL (European 
standard) VCRs, and of equipment that is designed for 110 
volts, rather than the 220 volts used in Turkey. Cengiz 
suggested that U.S. experts meet with Jandarma,s technical 
people to consult on what equipment is best for their 
purposes. Cengiz also complained about long delays in deliver 
of equipment purchased in the U.S. (some orders have been 
outstanding for over a year), as well as long delays in 
obtaining repairs, because equipment had to be returned to 
the U.S. Cengiz believes that much &American8 equipment can 
be purchased from Turkish dealers, who are equipped to modify 
it for the local market, as well as to provide training and 
repairs. 
 
 
---------- 
Customs 
---------- 
 
 
¶8.  Starting in 1994 and continuing through 2002, the INCC 
program delivered to Customs equipment valued at some USD 
562,000. The majority of this equipment consists of computer 
equipment delivered in 1995; the remainder consists of ion 
scanners, digital cameras, and night vision pocketscopes 
delivered in 2000-2002. No items were provided in 2003. On 
January 15, Econoff met with Remazan Ulus, Director of 
Intelligence, and two other Customs officials. Ulus reported 
that the ion scanners (which detect narcotics and explosives) 
and fiberscopes (for trafficking in persons) are very 
actively used, along the most important smuggling routes. 
Customs receives monthly reports from the field as to the 
results obtained with this equipment, which Ulus describe as 
&very good.8 Now that the Habur Gate entry to Iraq has 
become an important border route, Ulus believes it would be 
useful to install a scanner at that location, as it would 
expedite inspections. (Note: Expedited inspections might help 
ease the serious border delay problems that are being 
experienced at Habur Gate. End Note.) 
 
 
¶9.  Also useful was a 2000 study funded by INCC on the 
possible use of sniffer dogs. Based on that study, Customs 
has to date purchased 25 dogs, and plans to purchase 14 more 
by the end of 2005. Normally, it obtains dogs from TNP, but 
this year none were made available, so Customs will have to 
purchase them from commercial breeders (at a cost of USD 
2-5,000 each). Ulus requested that Post assist in those 
purchases. 
¶10.  Ulus further noted that the computer equipment purchased 
in 1995 is used to track suspicious cargo in the Marmara Sea 
region. As an example of its utility, Ulus described a 
request recently received from Post to track a ship bearing a 
container, which the computers confirmed had previously been 
used to smuggle heroin. These computers are, however, nearing 
the end of their useful lives. 
 
 
---------- 
Turkish National Police 
---------- 
 
 
¶11.  Starting in 1986 and continuing through 2003, the INCC 
program provided TNP with equipment and training valued at 
over USD 1.2 million. In 2003, four videoscopes were 
delivered, of an aggregate value of approximately USD 
123,000. On January 16, Econoff met with Senturk Demiral, 
Manager of the TNP Ankara Division Technical (i.e., 
equipment) Department. Demiral reported that the equipment 
furnished is essential to resolving particular types of 
cases. Many items are nearing the end of their useful lives 
and will be removed from service this year. The equipment 
with the highest utility is used in Istanbul and Izmir. Most 
useful are the above-mentioned videoscopes and a GPS tracking 
system, purchased in 2000. Nevertheless, the GPS equipment is 
not as useful as it might be, as it is not truly &mobile8 
) it draws power from a car battery, and has a large 
antennae. The equipment satisfies TNP,s current needs, and 
TNP has no need of additional equipment at this time. 
However, TNP does need funds for training on the latest 
investigative techniques, particularly with respect to 
tapping GSM phones. Mr. Demiral also delivered a message from 
his superiors that TNP will cooperate fully with U.S. law 
enforcement agencies with respect to information sharing. 
 
 
¶12.  On 27 January, Econoff and DEA agents met with Tufan 
Erguder, Chief of the Narcotics Division of the Istanbul 
Police Department. Erguder reported that there has been a 
substantial increase in seizures during the past year, which 
he attributed to operational improvements. Indeed, Erguder 
reported that, earlier that same day, the Istanbul police had 
seized one ton of heroin ) the largest such seizure in the 
history of Europe, he claimed. (DEA agents later advised 
Econoff that Erguder has completely reorganized the Narcotics 
Division and is a very effective manager.) Erguder reported 
that the Narcotics Division has need of a computer network; 
of vehicles appropriate to undercover work (i.e., that do not 
obviously look like unmarked police cars); and of training in 
the latest surveillance techniques, such as bugging GSM phone 
conversations and internet communications. Erguder confirmed 
some compatibility problems with equipment provided by the 
U.S., but described them as &not big.8 
 
 
---------- 
AMATEM 
---------- 
 
 
¶13.  Amatem is a state-sponsored drug rehabilitation 
facility, located in Istanbul. It has 150 beds for in-patient 
treatment (averaging 3-5 weeks), and also provides 
out-patient therapy. In 2003, it treated 14,791 patients, 
with a professional staff consisting of 10 doctors, 6 
psychologists, and 2 physical therapists. Starting in 1994 
and continuing through 2003, the INCC program delivered to 
Amatem computer and communications equipment valued at some 
$86,000. In 2003, the INCC program provided Amatem with 
various items of computer hardware and software, and a 
telephone switchboard, having a total value of over $38,000. 
On January 26, 2004, Econoff met with Dr. Duran Cakmak, 
Amatem,s Director, and five other officials, to discuss the 
program and tour the facility. These officials reported that 
the equipment is being used for patient management and 
rehabilitation, and to establish a hotline, and that it has 
proven very useful. For the future, Amatem needs funds to 
update a study of drug use among high school students; to 
update its drug prevention program for high school students, 
teachers and doctors; and to provide its staff with 
additional professional training. 
DEUTSCH