This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 000856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2014 
TAGS: EAID SNAR TU
SUBJECT: MEETING AT MFA RE DUBLIN GROUP 
 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 139 
 
 
Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch. Reason: 1.5 (B), (D), 
(E). 
 
 
¶1.  (U) On February 11 Econoff met with Murat Ates, Head of 
Department, International Political Organizations, MFA, to 
discuss Turkey,s application to join the Dublin Group (DG). 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Ates reiterated Turkey's interest in joining the DG 
and explained the GOT's opposition to forming a Mini-Dublin 
Group (MDG) (Reftel). First, he argued that formation of a 
MDG is generally viewed as a sign that a country is in 
difficulty, while Turkey's anti-narcotics regime has been 
quite successful. Second, the GOT thinks it is discriminatory 
that the new EU members from Eastern Europe will be admitted 
to the DG, when Turkey's anti-narcotics contributions are 
much greater and its condition much better. Third, the GOT 
fears that if it agrees to a MDG, it will never get a firm 
date for joining the DG. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ates also mentioned his belief that the Ankara 
embassies of certain countries that are members of DG have 
formed an informal MDG, and are meeting regularly. Econoff 
said he was unaware of such meetings. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Ates said that not all of the DG members from the EU 
are opposed to Turkey's membership in the DG, and that 
support from the U.S. could be determinative. He 
acknowledged, however, that it is unlikely that anything will 
happen before next June, when the DG is expected to adopt 
formal rules of membership. 
EDELMAN