This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000244 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KDEM YM HUMAN RIGHTS DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT: U.S. RECORD 2003-04: SUPPORT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND 
DEMOCRACY IN YEMEN 
 
REF: A. 03 SANAA 1101 
     ¶B. 03 SECSTATE 333935 
 
¶1. (u) Paragraph 2 contains Post's input for the 2003-04 
edition of "Supporting Human Rights and Democracy: the U.S. 
Record" per reftel b.  Because last year's report on Yemen 
contained programs that were ongoing throughout 2003-04 (ref 
a), Post's input consists of updated language on ongoing 
programs and additional language on new programs.  Submission 
will also be sent to DRL via e-mail as a tracked changes 
document. 
 
¶2. (u) Begin Text: 
 
Yemen 
 
Although events in 2003 reflect improvement in its human 
rights record, Yemen has a history of problems in both the 
political and social sphere, including citizens' limited 
ability to change the government, a weak judiciary, human 
rights abuses, and laws limiting freedom of expression.  The 
2003-2004 U.S. human rights and democracy strategy for Yemen 
addresses the need for the Government to continue to 
strengthen its human rights record, continue to enact social 
reforms, improve problems within the judiciary, and further 
the process of democratic development.  The United States 
continued several long-term projects addressing these issues, 
including programs aimed at strengthening Yemen's political 
parties, improving election administration, increasing voter 
participation, fostering civil society and improving the 
country's human rights record. 
 
The Defense Department Counter-Terrorism Fellowship funds a 
training program in the United States for Yemeni military 
officers, one aim of which is to convey the importance of 
respecting human rights.  This program is highly successful 
in Yemen and is ongoing. 
 
Yemen continued a long-term program of judicial reform, in an 
attempt to counter the numerous problems within the 
judiciary.  Yemen's Minister of Justice and other jurists 
participated actively in the Middle East Partnership 
Initiative's Arab Judicial Forum.  The courts are only 
nominally independent and have been plagued by corruption, 
executive branch interference, and the failure of authorities 
to enforce rulings. 
 
In addition to political reforms, the United States has been 
urging the Government of Yemen to enact social reforms and 
encourage respect for human rights. The United States engages 
frequently with the Government's Ministry of Human Rights to 
improve the Government's ability and willingness to redress 
specific human rights abuses.  The Embassy continued to 
support 17 separate NGO projects in 2003.  Two programs to 
provide training and capacity building to NGOs targeted rural 
areas where civil society remains nascent. Another project 
raised awareness of the struggles and rights of disabled 
children in public schools to combat discrimination.  Several 
projects aimed to improve women's rights.  Yemeni women have 
traditionally been politically and socially marginalized, 
with limited political representation in parliament or local 
councils despite high voter participation, restricted access 
to healthcare and education, as well as widespread reports of 
domestic abuse, and some instances of female genital 
mutilation.  Under a USDA program, the Embassy established a 
project to build and furnish new primary schools for girls in 
isolated rural areas in order to give girls access to modern 
education and to facilitate their inclusion within society. A 
$2 million MEPI-funded program aims to address the 67% 
illiteracy rate among women and girls. 
 
USAID reopened its offices in Yemen in 2003.  USAID is 
promoting a social/economic development program to address 
some fundamental human issues facing the Government of Yemen 
and its people, including:  health; basic education and 
literacy; food security and employment in a predominantly 
agricultural society; and strengthening democratic 
institutions. 
 
In 2003, International Visitor Programs brought NGO 
activists, government officials and other leaders to the 
United States to gain skills and knowledge in such areas as 
youth leadership, women's leadership in civil society and the 
public and private sector and community service and NGOs. 
 
A multi-year Department of Labor-supported program 
administered through the International Labor Organization 
continued combating the problem of street child labor in 2003. 
 
Although the citizens of Yemen still have limited ability to 
change their Government, significant strides have been made 
to address problems plaguing the electoral system, including 
poorly-organized voter registration resulting in 
disenfranchisement, inadequate election day administration 
and fraud prevention, and inequitable political party 
participation.   The United States funded programs by the 
National Democratic Institute (NDI) and the International 
Foundation for Election Systems (IFES) to strengthen Yemen's 
multi-party system.  They worked directly with political 
activists to improve future elections by focusing on 
increasing women's political participation and 
representation, improving voter registration, particularly 
among women, and strengthening election day administration. 
 
NDI continued a U.S.-funded program to improve the ability of 
local councils to represent the citizens through a better 
understanding of the law governing local councils.  The April 
2003 national parliamentary elections were generally 
considered to have been a significant improvement over 
previous elections, with good marks for organization, 
participation and security.  For example, women's 
registration and participation in the election increased by 
more than 40% to reach more than 75% of eligible women voters 
participating.  The Ambassador, embassy staffers, and 
election observers from IFES, NDI, the European Union and the 
UN were present at polling places throughout the country to 
observe the elections. 
 
In 2004, the Embassy will increase programming designed to 
strengthen democratic institutions, decentralize authority 
and resource management, and expand opportunities for civil 
society in decision-making. 
 
Regionally, the U.S. supported the al-Khalij Forum For 
Democratic Political Action, held in Sanaa in October 2003. 
It was the third such forum in the region, which brought 
together democratic activists from the Gulf and Iraq to 
improve their advocacy skills in fostering political reform 
in the region. 
MISENHEIMER