This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.id: 14061
date: 2/18/2004 19:19
refid: 04BOGOTA1680
origin: Embassy Bogota
classification: CONFIDENTIAL
destination: 04BOGOTA1198
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BOGOTA 001680 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2014 
TAGS: PREL KJUS PTER SNAR PHUM CO AUC GOV
SUBJECT: GOC TAKING ACTION AGAINST PARAMILITARY CEASE-FIRE 
VIOLATIONS 
 
REF: BOGOTA 1198 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William B. Wood for reasons 1.5 (b) 
and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Since agreeing to a unilateral cease-fire in late 
November 2002, Colombia's major paramilitary groups -- the 
United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC), Central Bolivar 
Bloc (BCB) and Eastern Alliance have committed at least 370 
murders, kidnappings, and other human rights violations 
nationwide.  They are also suspected of up to 1,500 other 
violations.  The AUC has committed approximately 120 
confirmed cease-fire violations, including nine massacres, 
and the BCB approximately 60, including nine additional 
massacres.  AUC political chief Carlos Castano publicly 
admitted that the AUC has violated the cease-fire, and said 
the only way to fully observe it in the context of ongoing 
conflict would be to concentrate all AUC forces in specific 
zones protected by the security forces. 
 
¶2. (C) The GOC recognizes that the cease-fire has been 
violated with frequency, and has therefore continued 
offensive operations against paramilitary groups.  Nearly 
4,000 paramilitaries have been captured and 450 killed since 
President Uribe took office in August 2002.  The OAS, which 
has agreed to verify and monitor paramilitary demobilization 
and reintegration, has said it will verify the cease-fire, 
but only after paramilitary combatants enter specific 
concentration zones.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Imperfectly Observed Cease-Fire 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) As President Uribe acknowledged in his February 4 
meeting with DAS Peter DeShazo (reftel), the United 
Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) and other paramilitary 
groups have not adhered perfectly to the cease-fire they 
declared in late 2002 as a precondition for demobilization 
negotiations with the GOC.  Vice-President Francisco Santos 
publicly criticized these cease-fire violations on February 
12 and emphasized that the GOC will not tolerate paramilitary 
violence.  According to the Presidential Program for Human 
Rights, the GOC has confirmed approximately 370 paramilitary 
cease-fire violations -- primarily murders and kidnappings -- 
that occurred between November 29, 2002 and February 9, 2004. 
 The AUC was responsible for approximately 120 violations, 
including nine massacres (defined by the GOC as four or more 
persons killed at one time).  The BCB, which also agreed to a 
cease-fire and eventual demobilization, was responsible for 
approximately 60 violations, including nine other massacres. 
The Eastern Alliance, an amalgam of various paramilitary 
groups operating on Colombia's eastern plains, was 
responsible for approximately 25 confirmed cease-fire 
violations.  Smaller paramilitary groups that did not sign on 
to a cease-fire were responsible for at least 12 confirmed 
human rights crimes during this period, including five 
massacres.  However, the GOC suspects that paramilitaries may 
also be to blame for as many as 1,500 other human rights 
crimes since November 2002.  Of these, the AUC itself is 
suspected of 650 crimes.  Although some of these violations 
involved clashes between rival paramilitary groups, most were 
directed at the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia 
(FARC), National Liberation Army (ELN), or non-combatants. 
 
¶4. (U) On February 16, AUC political chief Carlos Castano 
publicly admitted that the AUC has repeatedly violated the 
terms of the cease-fire.  He said a full cease-fire is 
impossible as long as the FARC continues offensive military 
actions, but emphasized that the AUC remains committed to 
demobilization.  Castano said the AUC will be in a position 
to abide fully by the cease-fire once its troops gather in 
concentration zones secured by the armed forces. 
 
¶5. (C) Despite paramilitary cease-fire violations, the 
overall level of paramilitary violence has fallen 
significantly since the cease-fires were implemented. 
According to the GOC, only 13 persons died in paramilitary 
massacres during 2003, compared with 54 in 2002 and 281 in 
¶2001.  In 2003, nationwide murders fell by 20 percent, 
massacres by 40 percent, kidnappings by 30 percent, and 
forced displacements by nearly 50 percent.  Although the 
security forces' expanding presence throughout national 
territory has been the major factor in reductions in 
violence, we also attribute the drop in paramilitary 
violations to the cease-fire agreement and the general halt 
of paramilitary efforts to establish new areas of control. 
 
--------------------------- 
GOC Tough on Paramilitaries 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Aware that the cease-fire has been repeatedly 
violated, the GOC has continued military and law enforcement 
operations against paramilitaries, including groups involved 
in negotiations.  Since Uribe took office in August 2002, the 
security forces have captured nearly 4,000 paramilitaries and 
killed almost 450 in combat.  These are increases of 164 and 
131 percent, respectively, compared to the last 18 months of 
the Pastrana administration.  By comparison, captures  and 
deaths in combat of guerrillas have increased 167 and 43 
percent, respectively. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (C) Although the GOC continues to take aggressive actions 
against paramilitaries, it needs a concentration of 
paramilitaries in specific, controllable zones, to enforce 
the unilateral cease-fire.  The OAS has agreed to verify the 
cease-fire once combatants are concentrated.  The GOC is in 
the process of preparing, institutionally and financially, to 
implement such a large-scale concentration.  The Ambassador 
has denounced in the press paramilitary failures to adhere to 
their cease-fire commitment.  We will continue to encourage 
the GOC to maintain military actions against all illegal 
armed groups. 
WOOD 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================