This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA/PE/C/CU; NEA/PPD JDAVIES AND JKINCANNON; 
NEA/ARP CKANESHIRO 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP OEXC SCUL KPAO BA
SUBJECT:  ENAGING YOUNGER BAHRAINIS WITH ROCK AND ROLL 
 
¶1.  PAS Manama engaged younger and more diverse 
Bahraini audiences by programming American rock `n' 
roll band "Circus Guy" from January 14-18, 2004. 
Circus Guy's program included performing live on Radio 
Bahrain's popular weekend music and interview program, 
an acoustic performance for critically ill children and 
their families at a local hospital, and performing at 
the Bahrain Mall, where Bahraini and Saudi families and 
teenagers congregate on weekends.  Emboffs attending 
Circus Guy's performance at the Mall witnessed Saudi 
and Bahraini women in their black "abbayas" smiling and 
gently swaying to Elvis Presley along with their 
teenage sons and daughters.  The four-member group also 
performed jointly with young Bahraini musicians at 
popular jazz club "Likwid" and conducted an afternoon 
guitar workshop for young music students at the Bahrain 
Music Institute.  At "Likwid," Circus Guy jammed with 
local Bahraini band "Myoclonic Jerk" fusing diverse 
musical styles and promoting mutual understanding with 
an audience in the early twenties.  All performances 
received good coverage in the Bahraini media. 
 
¶2.  Post recommends Circus Guy for similar programming 
in the region.  The musicians were perfect good-will 
ambassadors, impressive in their performances, warm and 
culturally sensitive with Bahraini contacts, adaptable 
and easy to program.  Since the musicians are in their 
twenties (and two are Iraqi-Americans), they related 
particularly well with youth and families.  The 
vocalist is currently studying at the American 
University in Cairo, and she sang several songs in 
Arabic, to the delight of audiences. 
 
¶3.  Post warmly thanks PAS Kuwait for identifying 
Circus Guy and offering to share them with neighboring 
posts, and especially for taking care of the mind 
boggling logistics related to getting four musicians, 
and their gear, to the Gulf.  We also appreciate the 
funding support provided by PAS Kuwait.  Due to the 
continuing resolution, we would not have been able to 
program Circus Guy without Kuwait's cost sharing. 
 
FORD