This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MAPUTO 000274 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR E:APENCE, EB/IFD/OIA:MKELLY AND JHAUSER,INL/C:DLUNA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON EINV ETRD PGOV MZ KCOR
SUBJECT: MOZAMBICAN PARTICIPATION IN EVIAN G-8 TRANSPARENCY 
PILOT -- INTERIM RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 33364 
¶B. MAPUTO 148 (NOTAL) 
¶C. STATE 16100 
Sensitive But Unclassified -- Protect Accordingly 
 
¶1. (U) Initial Mozambican government reaction to the 
Transparency Pilot Program, including the need for an 
explicit commitment at the outset to high transparency 
standards over time support, has been very positive. Further 
GRM consultations will be undertaken before we receive a 
formal response. 
 
¶2. (U) Ambassador presented REFTEL A demarche February 27 
to Ministry of Planning and Finance Permanent Secretary 
Victor Borges and explained the belief that this initiative 
could support the Mozambican government's substantial work in 
building a transparent financial management system. Borge's 
stressed the government's commitment to transparency as one 
of the key elements in public sector reform. He indicated he 
would discuss the demarche documents within the ministry and 
with other ministries, including those working on public 
sector reform, but made an initial statement the Mozambican 
Government would be very open to the initiative. Post will 
report further when the Government has had the chance to 
discuss the initiative internally. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Comment: With the appointment last week of 
Minister of Planning and Finance Luisa Diogo as Prime 
Minister, the Transparency Pilot initiative should be very 
well received. Diogo, who retains the Finance portfolio in 
addition to the Prime Ministership, has been the driving 
force behind the creation of a transparent financial 
management system. With only a short mandate as Prime 
Minister before general elections at the end of the year, 
this initiative can provide her a deliverable in an area 
where she is deeply committed. End Comment 
LA LIME