This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 000955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, NEA/IR-RAPHEL, NEA/FO-TAYLOR 
NSC FOR BRYZA AND MCKIBBEN 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JLEICHTER AND MMILLS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AF EAID EFIN IZ PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY WAITING FOR IMPROVED DONOR COORDINATION 
BEFORE DISBURSING ITS USD 50 MILLION PLEDGE FOR IRAQ 
RECONSTRUCTION 
 
REF: STATE 031782 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Turkey's Coordinator for Afghan and Iraq 
Assistance Ambassador Okcun said Turkey is ready to start 
disbursing its USD 50 million pledge for Iraq Reconstruction, 
but is waiting for better coordination among donors.  Okcun 
will participate in the preparatory meeting for the 
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq (IRFFI) 
in Dubai, but Turkey will make only a small contribution to 
the facility to show solidarity.  Turkey is preparing new 
projects in Afghanistan as part of its additional USD 5 
million pledge.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Econoff met with Ambassador Ahmet Okcun, Turkey's 
Coordinator for Assistance to Iraq and Afghanistan, to 
discuss Turkey's Madrid Pledge, as requesteed reftel.  Okcun 
said Turkey has drawn up a list of projects that it would 
like to undertake; however, the projects will not go forward 
until there is effective coordination among donors.  Okcun 
said Turkey does not know enough about the details of U.S. 
funded projects, much less the plans of the other donor 
countries, and is concerned that without full coordination, 
it might duplicate or interfere with projects undertaken by 
other donors. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) Okcun was pleased to receive the information about 
the Iraqi donor coordination mechanism, the Iraqi Strategic 
Review Board, and the name and e-mail for points of contacts 
in the Ministry for Planning and National Development and 
CPA.  Okcun will travel to Baghdad February 24-25 and plans 
to contact those officials to discuss Turkey's projects. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Okcun was aware of the meeting in Dubai, February 
28-29, and planned to attend if he received an invitation. 
He said Turkey would make only a symbolic contribution to the 
IRFFI to show its solidarity for the work undertaken by the 
UN and World Bank.  He explained that Turkey prefers to 
directly control the projects under its USD 50 million 
pledge.  He said the government is proud of its successful 
projects in Afghanistan and wants to duplicate that success 
in Iraq.  Okcun asked whether those donors countries unable 
to contribute USD 10 milllion to the facility will be 
represented on the IRFFI donors committee, as is the case for 
the Afghanistan Trust Fund.  He also asked for more 
information about the Dubai meetings -- whether they will 
focus on the IRFFI only or will discuss broader donor 
coordination. 
 
 
¶5.  (U) Turning to Afghanistan, Okcun noted that Turkey 
increased its pledge for Afghanistan from USD 5 million to 
USD 10 million and will start a number of new projects next 
month with the added money.  He was glad to hear that 
Ambassador Taylor was considering a visit to Ankara March 12 
and asked that he have an opportunity to meet with Ambassador 
Taylor early in his schedule because he must leave the 
afternoon of March 12 to to attend the Afghanistan 
Development Forum in Kabul, March 16-17. 
 
 
¶6.  (U) Baghdad and Kabul minimize considered. 
EDELMAN