This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 000437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR IO/UNP, SA/FO AMBASSADOR TAYLOR, SA/AR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF AF BR
SUBJECT: AFGHAN PRESENTATION FOR BRAZILIAN MILITARY 
OFFICIALS 
 
¶1.  (U) During a DATT-hosted 18 February dinner for key 
military contacts, poloff, recently returned from an 
Afghanistan TDY, delivered a graphic powerpoint presentation 
on Coalition nation building efforts in that country. The 
presentation focused on four themes: the overall security and 
reconstruction mission of the US-led Coalition; the nature, 
role, and skill sets of the Provincial Reconstruction Teams 
(PRTs); the desperate needs of the Afghan people; and the 
range of assistance being delivered to Afghanistan by the 
USG. Brazilian attendees represented all three armed service 
branches as well as the Ministries of Defense and Foreign 
Relations. 
 
¶2.  (U) Questions during and after the presentation, 
particularly from the professional military officers, 
indicated a keen interest in how the Coalition was moving 
from emphasis on counter-Taliban/al Qaeda combat operations 
(Phase III) to greater focus on stabilization/reconstruction 
(Phase IV). Attendees were struck by Afghanistan's low levels 
of economic and social development, particularly in the rural 
areas, and impressed by the range of institution building 
programs already underway. Many were impressed by the 
country's extensive poppy cultivation and acknowledged the 
huge challenge of poppy eradication given the country's 
poverty and lack of cash crops. One officer queried as to the 
time horizon for rebuilding Afghanistan, implying a question 
as to whether the USG had the staying power to finish the 
job. Other questions concerned the logistical support behind 
national reconstruction. Analogies with Iraq's political and 
reconstruction issues were also raised, and some officers 
later asked if a similar USG presentation could be delivered 
to the Brazilian military regarding that country. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Comment: Attendees displayed curiosity about the 
Coalition's nation building efforts and appeared drawn to the 
possible relevance of the Afghan experience to Brazil's own 
future international missions. The presentation sought to 
portray the U.S. mission in Afghanistan in its true light, 
countering local misperceptions that the U.S. only cares 
about its own interests and Coalition soldiers huddle behind 
the wire in fortified compounds. While there is little 
likelihood Brazil will contribute to efforts in Afghanistan 
at this time, the military desires to learn more about the 
situation there. In light of Brazil's current seat on the 
UNSC and the internal GOB review of Brazil's future 
peacekeeping efforts, particularly in Africa, poloff 
suggested the GOB consider having a team go to Afghanistan. 
Officers affirmed that Brazil's armed forces, if ordered, 
were ready and willing to engage in international PKO 
efforts. However funding remains a big hurdle. Poloff will 
continue to offer this presentation to other key Brazilian 
audiences. 
Minimized considered 
Hrinak