This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 000273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  02/19/14 
TAGS: AMGT CE MV
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 026 (02/19/04) 
 
Classified by DCM James F. Entwistle for reasons 1.5 (b) and 
(d). 
 
CONTENTS: LOCAL REACTION TO FEB 17 CO-CHAIRS MEETING 
          SRI LANKA CAMPAIGN NUGGETS 
          MALDIVES RECEPTION 
 
LOCAL REACTION TO FEB 17 CO-CHAIRS MEETING 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶1.  (C) You will see our front-channel today regarding 
reaction to February 17 Co-chairs meeting.  Media reaction 
is just beginning to flow in:  it has been fairly 
straightforward with little commentary as of yet.  Political 
contacts and local observers were generally upbeat.  We will 
provide more reaction in a separate media play cable later. 
(POL) 
 
SRI LANKA CAMPAIGN NUGGETS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) FYI.  Here are the latest nuggets regarding the 
April 2 parliamentary election campaign: 
 
-- Fierce arguments continue within the Tamil United 
Liberation Front (TULF) between party leader V. 
Anandasangaree and pro-Tiger elements.  We are not sure 
where this is headed, but with nominations only being 
accepted until Feb. 24 something has got to give soon.  If 
pro-Tiger TULF members are not allowed to contest the 
election under the Tamil National Alliance (TNA) umbrella 
(Anandasangaree does not like the pro-LTTE TNA and says he 
won't agree to run under that banner), it seems possible 
that they may run under the name, "Federal Party."  This 
would leave Anandasangaree as the only candidate under the 
TULF name. 
 
-- Ronnie de Mel, a senior MP in the President's People's 
Alliance, appears committed to remaining with the party 
despite media reports that he would defect to the PM's 
United National Party. 
 
-- During brief remarks made during the opening of a school 
in her home district of Gampaha, President Kumaratunga 
struck a moderate tone on the peace process.  She indicated 
that her party would work hard with the LTTE and not do 
anything to incite or provoke the group into another armed 
conflict.  The President went on to say that she was focused 
on helping the LTTE become a democratic, political entity. 
(POL) 
 
MALDIVES RECEPTION 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (U)  Appreciate the go-ahead.  The timing is good for 
making some timely points.  (DCM) 
 
 
LUNSTEAD