This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 000665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: EPET ECON PREL KU SA JO TC
SUBJECT: MUASHER ASKS FOR HELP WITH THE SAUDIS ON OIL 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 72 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 348 
     ¶C. AMMAN 459 
 
Classified By: CDA David Hale for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
UAE, KUWAIT HAVEN'T MADE ALL PROMISED OIL PAYMENTS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher told the Ambassador 
and PolCouns January 21 that neither Kuwait nor the UAE had 
yet provided all the free oil they had promised to Jordan in 
the aftermath of the Iraq war.  Kuwait, he asserted, had 
committed to providing 25,000 bpd for six months, and Jordan 
had gotten "a loose commitment" for an additional three 
months.  Kuwait had given Jordan two months of oil, but had 
stopped that supply when it learned that Jordan was selling 
the oil because it was incompatible with Jordan's refinery. 
Jordan and Kuwait, Muasher said, had reached an understanding 
on Jordanian sale of future shipments "two or three weeks 
ago" (i.e. early January 2004).  Therefore, in his 
estimation, Kuwait still needed to provide another four 
months of oil to meet its six month commitment.  Similarly, 
the UAE had not fulfilled its earlier commitment to provide 
cash payments of the equivalent of 25,000 bpd for six months, 
thus far having made only "two or three" payments.  It is 
important that Kuwait and the UAE meet their original 
pledges, since the GOJ, he said, has included these pledges 
as assistance revenue in its 2004 budget (ref a). 
 
--------------------------------------- 
JORDAN NEEDS USG HELP WITH SAUDI ARABIA 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Given the uncertainty of future shipments/payments 
from Kuwait and the UAE (refs b and c), Muasher said it is 
crucial for Jordan that Saudi Arabia continue its supply of 
free oil to Jordan.  He asked that the USG weigh in with the 
Saudis and encourage them to continue to assist Jordan. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  It is clear that the GOJ believes that it needs 
continued support from the Gulf to meet its IMF deficit 
targets.  We do not believe that an extension of Gulf oil aid 
would lead to a relaxation of budgetary rigor, including the 
commitment to increase consumer prices of oil products.  It 
would likely be used to finance sorely needed social spending 
or government investment that would otherwise go unfunded. 
This would also help shore up support for the government's 
political and economic reform plans.  We may wish to weigh in 
with the Saudis, Kuwaitis, and Emiratis to determine whether 
they intend to continue to provide free or discounted oil to 
Jordan. 
 
¶4.  (U)  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
HALE