This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 000368 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
CJTF-HOA FOR MAJOR TRIPP NARROW 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OIIP YM PMIL
SUBJECT: INVITATION FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICERS TO 
VISIT EMBASSY SANAA 
 
 ¶1. (sbu) As a follow-up to the recent CJTF-HOA 
Political/Military Officers conference hosted at Camp 
Lemonier, January 20-21, Embassy Sana'a would like to extend 
an invitation to appropriate information officers at CJTF-HOA 
in Djibouti to meet with Post public diplomacy officers in 
Sana'a. 
 
¶2. (sbu) The purpose of the meetings would be to explore the 
value-added of joining efforts to develop an appropriate 
country-specific message on U.S.-Yemen cooperation in 
counter-terrorism and economic development.  Officers will be 
able to discuss cooperation face-to-face and to develop 
specific proposals for public outreach and media campaigns. 
One possible focus for cooperation is the imminent arrival 
and commissioning of EDA boats, which represents a large step 
towards launching the Yemeni Coast Guard.  Other potential 
areas of cooperation include publicizing joint training, 
civil affairs projects and economic development efforts. 
 
¶3. (sbu) Embassy Sana'a welcomes the opportunity to develop a 
plan with CJTF-HOA information officers for potential 
cooperation, which would be subject to approval by the 
Ambassador and key Post officers.  Point of contact for 
arranging the visit will be John Balian, Public Affairs 
Officer, tel. 967-1-303-155, ext. 2451, classified e-mail: 
BalianJO@state.sgov.gov or unclassified e-mail: 
BalianJO@state.gov. 
HULL