This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ARP,INL/G/TIP, NEA/RA, AND DRL/IL 
CAIRO FOR STEVE BONDY 
LONDON FOR ETHAN GOLDRICH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KCRM ELAB BA
SUBJECT: EMBASSY SEEKS MORE BAHRAINI ACTION ON TIP 
 
REF: A. 03 MANAMA 2798 
 
     ¶B. 03 MANAMA 3015 
 
¶1.  (U)  On February 22, POL/ECON Chief asked MFA Assistant 
Undersecretary for Coordination and Follow-up Shaikh Abdul 
Aziz bin Mubarak Al Khalifa if he could provide an update on 
anti-TIP activities since ref A.  Shaikh Abdul Aziz is the 
overall coordinator of TIP-related work with the USG.  P/E 
Chief reminded him that the new USG TIP legislation requires 
more precise reporting to support TIP tier rankings and 
inquired if the GOB had any statistical data on TIP 
prevention, investigations and prosecution that could be 
included in Post's report.  P/E Chief noted that Post's draft 
is due on March 1. 
 
¶2.  (U)  P/E Chief suggested to Shaikh Abdul Aziz that it 
would be especially helpful to have current information on 
two high profile cases recently featured in the press.  In 
particular, P/E Chief mentioned the case of a Bangladeshi 
worker in a pending labor case that was forcibly repatriated 
and the case of Anita Verma (see reftel B).  Shaikh Abdul 
Aziz said he would raise these two cases in a meeting that he 
had already scheduled with Deputy Attorney General Shaikh 
Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa to follow up on 200 worker abuse 
cases that Bahrain Centre for Human Rights activist Selma 
Bala has submitted for action.  P/E Chief added that we would 
like to mention Bahrain's ratification of the UN Convention 
on Transnational Crime in the report. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Shaikh Abdul Aziz had no information for P/E Chief 
and admitted that MFA had homework to do.  He tentatively 
scheduled a meeting with A/DCM and PolOFF on March 3 to 
provide an update on anti-TIP activities.  Since the TIP 
report is due on March 1, P/E Chief said that we would write 
the report based on the information in hand and submit it by 
the deadline.  However, the report would state that an update 
would be produced after the meeting with Shaikh Abdul Aziz. 
FORD