This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BOGOTA 001558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/LP 
 
TAGS: SNAR PREL MOPS MASS PGOV CO
SUBJECT:  AIR BRIDGE DENIAL: JANUARY 2004 PROGRAM UPDATE 
 
REF:  A. 2003 STATE 265910 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Following is the January Air Bridge Denial 
(ABD) activity report required by ref A.  There were over 
4800 tracks sorted, of which 42 were declared Unidentified, 
Assumed Suspect (UAS) Tracks, with one Phase I and one Phase 
III event during the month.  ABD program issues of concern 
include the availability and basing of interceptors.  End 
Summary. 
 
ABD Tracks 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) In January 2004, over 4800 tracks were sorted, of 
which 42 were declared UAS aircraft.  The GOC did not react 
to 28 UAS, 17 due to non-availability of assets or proximity 
to borders, seven due to proximity to international waters, 
two due to the track information being dated or 
insufficient, and the remaining two were eventually 
identified as friendly.  There was an interception on 
January 5 that did not proceed beyond phase I due to 
collateral damage concerns. 
 
Phase II Event 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On January 24, a track was picked up by ROTHR near 
the Brazilian border in the Dog's Head area.  A Citation was 
airborne nearby and was sent to intercept; a Colombian Air 
Force (FAC) "Arpia" (UH-60 with Miniguns) stationed at Mitu 
was also scrambled for this event.  The Citation intercepted 
the aircraft and accomplished visual ID of a two-engine, low 
wing aircraft bearing what appeared to be Brazilian 
identification.  The target aircraft subsequently landed at 
Caruru where it was pushed to the treeline and concealed 
with a fake building, plastic tarps, and vegetation.  The 
Citation accomplished several Phase I calls with no 
response, then completed phase II calls before proceeding 
with warning shots by the "Arpia".  GOC officials assessed 
that there was minimal likelihood of collateral damage and 
proceeded with phase III, resulting in destruction of the 
aircraft. (Note: In the course of subsequent Colombian 
National Police reinsertion operations, NAS Officer was able 
to confirm destruction of target aircraft and absence of 
collateral damage.) 
 
Ongoing Issues 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The FAC had deployed the "Arpia" helicopter to 
Mitu as part of the security package in support of President 
Uribe's visit the weekend of January 17.  This proved to be 
the decisive end-game asset that was not present during 
previous ABD events in the Dog's Head/Caruru area (there 
have been nine ABD events and numerous other tracks in this 
area since the ABD program was restarted in August 2003.) 
We expect the arrival of refurbished OV-10s to coincide with 
completion of repairs to the runway at Mitu.   Meanwhile, 
the GOC will retain "Arpia" helicopters at Mitu until OV-10s 
are deployed. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The GOC has repeatedly noted that the time required 
to perform Phase steps precluded bringing events to a 
conclusion.  For the January 24 Phase III, however, only 15 
minutes elapsed from request of ground Phase I to the target 
being destroyed.  This was accomplished despite repeated 
communications and an assessment of the possibility of 
collateral damage.  This event demonstrates that with assets 
properly located, the ABD required checklist steps can be 
performed in a reasonable time. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Air Bridge Denial Semi-Annual Program 
Management Review (PMR) will be held February 24-25 at JIATF- 
S, Key West, FL.  Tentative program follows: 
 
-USG meeting 
-Combined Review of program accomplishments to date 
-Combined Review of Jan-Feb ABD Events 
-Combined Review of Program Goals, Objectives, and Measures 
of Effectiveness 
-ABD Asset (Citation/C-26/End Game aircraft) Status 
-C-560 Familiarization 
-US/GOC Issues 
-Road Ahead 
-Letter of Agreement (LOA) review 
 
Post is coordinating with GOC to obtain their LOA/PMR 
inputs. 
 
Organizations desiring to attend must coordinate by February 
16 with Mr Ezequiel Parrilla, NAS ABD program Advisor, 011- 
571-383-2222, email parrillae@state.gov to confirm 
attendance and lodging/transportation arrangements. 
Security clearances must be confirmed with the JIATF-S 
Special Security Officer at 305-293-5484, fax 305-293-5506 
at least 10 days prior to travel.  POC for JIATF-S is CDR 
Wade Graft, 305-292-5311 DSN 483-5311, email 
rgraft@jiatfs.southcom.mil 
WOOD