This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  VATICAN 000594 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE: LEVIN; DRL/IRF: HUSER; AF/SPG: SMALL AND 
RAAD; AF/E; AF/RSA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIRF PHUM PINR PREL SU VT
SUBJECT: VATICAN: BISHOPS MUST BE MORE INVOLVED IN SUDAN 
 
REF: A. 03 VATICAN 5669 
     ¶B. VATICAN 239 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) In a meeting requested by the Holy See, Vatican 
Foreign Minister Giovanni Lajolo told the Ambassador the 
Sudanese Catholic bishops were in a position to play an 
important role in the North-South peace process.  In fact, 
according to Lajolo, their participation in reconciliation 
efforts and the reform of the constitutional and legal system 
is crucial to the possibility of long-term success.  Lajolo 
expressed the Holy See's concern for the humanitarian crisis 
in Darfur and the Church's desire to facilitate internally 
displaced person (IDP) and refugee returns there and 
elsewhere in Sudan.  The Holy See hopes that a nudge from the 
USG might prompt greater GOS openness to participation by the 
Sudanese bishops in all these endeavors.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Bishops Could be Crucial in North-South Peace Process 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  In previous reporting on the Holy See and Sudan, 
Post has noted the Vatican's desire that the Sudanese 
Catholic bishops be involved in interreligious dialogue -- 
and its belief that they are in a position to play a 
constructive role (reftels).  In a February 17 meeting with 
the Ambassador, Holy See Foreign Minister Giovanni Lajolo 
again emphasized the potential usefulness of the Catholic 
Church on the issue, noting that the Church could contribute 
to a "reconciliation of the factions in the South."  Lajolo 
added a sense of urgency to the subject we had not heard 
previously, underscored by the fact that he requested the 
meeting with the Ambassador specifically to speak about 
Sudan.  He said the GOS was not consulting adequately with 
the Sudanese bishops, who had been left out of the loop on 
many issues.  In particular, Lajolo said, the bishops should 
be involved in the reform of Sudan's constitution and legal 
system.  In this, and other issues, a non-paper Lajolo passed 
(complete text passed to EUR/WE) noted that "the Church must 
be involved in the preparatory stages (of reform planning)." 
Further, "special attention should be given to the question 
of the juridical definition of the Church, which cannot be 
understood as a NGO."  According to Lajolo, these subjects 
could have a significant impact on religious freedom issues. 
 
------------------------------- 
Holy See Concerned About Darfur 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Lajolo emphasized the Holy See's concern about the 
situation in Darfur, noting the humanitarian cost of the 
conflict.  Lajolo noted that there were few Christians in the 
region, but said that factor did not diminish the Holy See's 
attention to the human suffering in the area.  The non-paper 
stated that "humanitarian corridors" were no longer 
sufficient to ease human suffering in Darfur, and that "the 
parties, especially the Government of Khartoum, should be 
persuaded to undertake peace initiatives." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Church Anxious to be Involved; Hopes for USG Nudge 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ambassador noted the USG's commitment to peace in 
Sudan and our agreement that the Darfur situation was serious 
both from a humanitarian point of view and because of the 
threat it posed to progress in the North-South peace process. 
 Lajolo told the Ambassador that while the Church's efforts 
on behalf of peace and reconciliation would be most effective 
in the North-South dispute rather than in Darfur, the Holy 
See wanted to contribute to reconciliation in any way it 
could.  His memorandum noted that the Church "especially 
desires to assist in the return of (IDPs and) refugees." 
With the Holy See having already impressed upon the Sudanese 
 
bishops and the GOS the importance of cooperation and 
dialogue (reftels), the Vatican's contact with Post at the 
ambassadorial level signals the Holy See's seriousness on the 
issue, and its belief that a nudge from the USG might prompt 
the GOS to be more open to participation by the Sudanese 
bishops in these various endeavors. 
 
Nicholson 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2004VATICA00594 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED