This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

200437Z Feb 04UNCLAS ABUJA 000277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO PASS TO USTR FOR PATRICK COLEMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD NI
SUBJECT: REP. JEFFERSON'S MEETING WITH PRESIDENT OBASANJO, 
AGREMENT FOR CAMPBELL 
 
REF: 03 ABUJA 2231 AND ABUJA FAX 12/16/03 TO USTR AND 
 
     AF/W 
 
¶1.  President Obasanjo told visiting Congressman Jefferson, 
Charge Anyaso and notetakers February 16 that Nigeria has 
provided all necessary documents and legislation to the USG 
for the AGOA textiles visa (reftel and ref faxes), and 
considers the ball to be in the USG court.  Obasanjo agreed 
with Jefferson that Nigeria needed to work on exporting more 
processed agricultural goods such as tomatoes and fruits, to 
make more use of what is already available under AGOA, and 
will work on exporting software and footwear as well. 
Jefferson suggested industrial starch, which could be made 
from Nigeria's cassavas. 
 
¶2.  At the end of the meeting, Obasanjo told the CDA that he 
had signed the agrement for John Campbell to become the U.S. 
Ambassador to Nigeria.  (Note: Post received the paperwork 
and faxed it to the Department on February 17. End Note.) 
 
¶3.  Rep. Jefferson, on a private visit to Nigeria, said he 
was interested in the Gulf of Guinea Initiative, which 
President Obasanjo co-chairs.  Obasanjo said he had just been 
speaking with Gabon's President Bongo, and expected to visit 
Bongo by the end of March.  Ghana wanted to join the 
Initiative, and Nigeria would not object to Ghana and even 
Senegal becoming members.  The purpose, Obasanjo said, was to 
preserve peace and "stability of resources." 
 
¶4.  Rep. Jefferson suggested to President Obasanjo that U.S. 
firms were interested in investing to build fertilizer plants 
in Nigeria if the GON could provide no-cost or low-cost 
liquefied natural gas (LNG) until the U.S. firms recouped the 
cost of building the factories.  Obasanjo said he was 
interested, and asked Jefferson to send him a paper on such a 
proposal.  Obasanjo also said he would consider an offer by 
the Black Caucus Foundation to be their guest of honor at a 
conference in September if it was near enough to Obasanjo's 
planned visit to the U.S. for the UN General Assembly. 
ROBERTS