This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER ASEC NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA CTAG MEETING 
 
REF: STATE 14279 
 
SENSITVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTERNET OR INTRANET. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) February 5, per reftel instructions, CDA hosted the 
first Abuja CTAG meeting.  The meeting was attended by 
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Russian 
Federation, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Spain and the 
European Commission.  Few countries in attendance had recent 
or ongoing CT-related programs in Nigeria.  Those that did 
focussed primarily on developing the capacity of the Economic 
and Financial Crimes Commission to fight fraud and money 
laundering or on limited training of Nigerian law enforcement 
and immigration personnel in the detection of document fraud. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The countries in attendance expressed interest in 
expanding CT-related cooperation with the GON.  There was 
general support for increasing engagement with the Economic 
and Financial Crimes Commission and for continued efforts to 
train and professionalize Nigerian police and security 
personnel.  It is clear that any attempt to increase 
CT-related cooperation with the GON will be handicapped by 
the relative paucity of resources governments are willing to 
spend in Nigeria and in Africa, in general. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Based on consultations with other CTAG members, 
Embassy plans to expand the next meeting's list of 
participants to include Israel and The Netherlands.  While 
this first CTAG meeting hosted by the Embassy was limited to 
G-8 and other prospective donors, it was agreed that the next 
meeting will include representatives of the GON who are in a 
position to discuss what kinds of assistance would be most 
useful to Nigeria. 
ANYASO