This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000919 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Savings Deposit Insurance Fund Seizes Uzan Assets-Hurriyet 
Turkey Secures Support of 11 EU countries - Sabah 
Turkish Land Forces Commander Postpones Visit to Cyprus  - 
Milliyet 
FBI Officials in Ankara to Discuss Extradition of Uzans - 
Hurriyet 
PM Erdogan Rejects `Privileged Partnership' with EU - 
Hurriyet 
Positive Cyprus Developments Boost Markets - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Greek Cypriots Criticize Papadopoulos - Radikal 
Denktas: `too Early' for Celebrations in Cyprus - Cumhuriyet 
Harsh Reaction to `censorship' at "Star" - Cumhuriyet 
Foreign Ministry Sends Special Team to Cyprus-Radikal 
Erdogan Annoyed with CDU `Privileged Partnership' Offer - 
Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Seizure of Uzans' Assets:  All papers and TV channels report 
that the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (TMSF) acted to 
seize Uzan family assets, including more than 200 companies 
owned by the Uzans or their partners.  The seizures include 
"Star TV" and "Star" newspaper, the key outlets in the Uzan 
media empire.  The TMSF appointed new boards of directors to 
all countries seized in the operation.  In a written 
statement, the TMSF claimed that the Uzans were siphoning 
their capital and assets outside the country in order to 
escape the TL 7.5 quadrillion they owe the state from their 
fraud at Imar Bank.  Cem Uzan was asked to leave his villa 
within a week because it was registered as a `Media Group 
Guest House.'  Under the takeover procedures, all Uzan 
companies will be run by trustees.  Today's "Hurriyet" 
reports that the US has sent two FBI officials to Ankara to 
discuss the extradition of Kemal, Yavuz and Hakan Uzan. 
"Milliyet" draws attention to PM Erdogan's remarks that the 
action taken against the Uzan family will be applied to all 
other failed bank owners as well.  Meanwhile, Turkish Press 
Council chairman Oktay Eksi criticized the action against 
Uzan-owned "Star TV" and "Star" newspaper.  Eksi complained 
that the seizure violated the freedom of the press. 
 
 
Cyprus:  Weekend papers report that the Turkish and Greek 
Cypriots have agreed to begin discussions on February 19 
within the framework of the Annan plan.  The two sides will 
seek to agree on a reunification plan by March 22.  Monday's 
"Radikal" claims that, during the discussions in New York, 
the Greek side tried to provoke Denktas  to leave the table. 
However, with strong encouragement from Turkey side, Denktas 
showed extraordinary patience in his performance in New 
York.  Monday's "Yeni Safak" reports that Denktas has 
outlined three conditions for the success of the 
negotiations. First, the two sides must accept the `status' 
of the other.  Second, the guarantor status of Turkey must 
continue.  Finally, the presence of two sovereign states on 
the island must be accepted.  Weekend papers report that PM 
Erdogan and FM Gul praised Denktas for his successful work 
in New York. 
EU Accession:  All papers report that PM Erdogan harshly 
rejected a proposal by visitng chairman of the German 
Christian Democratic Union Angela Merkel for a `privileged 
partnership' with the EU instead of full EU membership. 
Erdogan reportedly termed the offer `unacceptable,' and 
argued that Turkey had shown greater progress in meeting EU 
criteria than any of the 10 candidate countries that will 
become new EU members in May. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Cyprus 
 
 
"Time to support Denktas" 
Cengiz Candar observed in the mass appeal "DB-Tercuman" 
(2/17):  "The negotiation mechanism that was set up in New 
York has imposed a solution on Cyprus. .  If the two Cyprus 
parties cannot agree on a solution, UNSG Annan will invite 
Turkey and Greece, together with the Cypriots, to New York 
to attend a `Dayton' or `Camp David'-style negotiation 
process. .  If a result is still not attained, then the UNSG 
will take the initiative and fill in the blanks in the 
draft.  The resulting plan will then be submitted to 
simultaneous referenda on the island.  Such provisions show 
that a solution to the Cyprus problem is now inevitable. . 
The Cyprus problem is essentially a problem between Turkey 
and Greece.  It is a problem of balance in the Eastern 
Mediterranean. .  The emergence of the Cyprus issue and of 
Greece's membership in the EU has disrupted that balance.  A 
solution to the Cyprus problem and an opening of Turkey's EU 
horizons might reestablish the balance. .  Since a solution 
is inevitable on Cyprus, we must strive to attain the best 
possible outcome for Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots within 
the parameters set out by the UN.  It is time to support 
Denktas toward that goal." 
 
 
"984 hours to go" 
Mehmet Ali Birand commented in the mass appeal "Posta" 
(2/17):  "We have now 984 hours to see all negotiations 
concluded on Cyprus. .  We expect tough negotiations on the 
political issues.  Believing they have already conceded a 
great deal, the Cypriot sides are preparing to put up their 
last fight.  No matter how much they yell about the process, 
somebody will come in to fill in the blanks if no compromise 
is reached. .  The only way to stop the solution process in 
Cyprus is by voting against the referenda.  The Greek 
Cypriots may vote against a settlement, but I don't think 
the Turkish Cypriots, poised to opt between getting rich or 
remaining poor, will oppose a solution." 
 
 
EDELMAN