This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 000507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EB AND EUR/SE 
DEPT PLEASE PASS USTR FOR LERRION 
USDOC FOR ITA/MAC/DDEFALCO 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD TU
SUBJECT:  New Import Surveillance Measures 
 
¶1. (U) On December 31, 2003, the GOT published a series 
of import surveillance and protection measures in the 
State Gazette.  The measures set import reference prices 
for consumer goods ranging from kitchenware to 
toothbrushes (see para 3 for summary).   The Foreign 
Trade Undersecretariat is now required trading companies 
importing these goods at prices below this level to 
apply for an import monitoring document.  China and Iran 
are specifically identified as targets of the 
surveillance in two of cases.  U.S. exports to Turkey 
are not likely to be affected. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a January 8 meeting with Econoff and Econ 
Specialist, Murat Yapici, Deputy Director General for 
Imports at the Foreign Trade U/S, emphasized that these 
are surveillance measures, not import restrictions, and 
that licensing approval will be given automatically 
within five days of application.  He said that the 
minimum prices triggering surveillance were so low that 
he did not expect imports from anywhere other than China 
to be affected by the measures. 
 
 
Surveillance Measures 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (U) The Circulars on "Import surveillance and 
protection measures" include the following: 
 
 
-- 2003/15:  Single-focused optical glasses imported 
from China; 
 
 
-- 2003/16:  Polystyrene (Crystal & anti-chock) imported 
from Iran; 
 
 
-- 2003/17:  Kitchen and household iron and steel 
products; iron and steel fiber; iron and steel made 
gloves, sponge, or other cleaning or shining tools, 
spoons, folks, fish knives, ladles and similar kitchen 
materials; 
 
 
-- 2003/18:  Taps (spigots):  Imports with a unit price 
equal to or lower than USD 10/kg  will be subject to 
surveillance; 
 
 
-- 2003/19:  Chests, suitcases, file folders, school 
bags, glass covers, field glass protectors, camera 
covers, and similar protective covers for  other 
optical, electronic products, guns, paper-covered suit 
bags, isolated food bags, cosmetic bags, back-packs, 
wallets, ID-holders, sports bags, and similar protective 
shelves, and covers.  Applies to products sold for USD 
5/unit or below. 
 
 
-- 2003/20: Tooth brushes with unit value $0.20, or 
below. 
 
 
-- 2003/21:  An investigation on parts used for optical 
frame production imported from China. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) While Turkey set a new export record in 2003, 
an even more rapid expansion in imports is likely to 
push the 2004 trade deficit over the USD 20 billion 
mark.  Top trade officials have said that they will 
continue to deploy anti-dumping measures to curb imports 
in the coming year.  Industry is particularly concerned 
about a surge in imports to Turkey from the PRC, already 
the target of about a quarter of Turkey's anti-dumping 
measures, and the prospect of Chinese displacement of 
Turkish exports in third country markets, especially 
after textile and apparel quotas are lifted next 
January.  We expect Turkey to continue to make full use 
of surveillance and anti-dumping investigations to blunt 
imports in the near term. 
Edelman