This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO PGOV HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, FEBRUARY 2, 2004 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El 
Heraldo" on 1/31 entitled "The big lie".  "At this point in 
time, it's just intolerable the attempt to justify the 
invasion and aggression to Iraq under the false pretense of 
the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. 
Besides, the theory of Saddam Hussein's participation in the 
attacks of 9/11, in an alliance with Al Qaeda, has also 
proven to be false." 
 
"Bush lied and keeps lying to the American public and the 
international community.  However, the truth is gradually 
emerging, and the American electorate will come to the 
realization that it's been a victim of a colossal lie that 
has provoked the destruction of Iraq, and the death and 
mutilation of thousands of people, including its own troops, 
while the transnational corporations tied to the highest 
imperial bureaucratic elites are collecting the profits of 
huge contracts in Iraq." 
 
"Under the notion of pre-emptive war, Bush has allowed 
himself to intervene anywhere in the world, whenever the 
fundamentalist right-wing politicians who are now part of 
the American political elite feel that their country's 
national security is being threatened." 
 
"There's no doubt that truth and honesty have also been 
victims of this terrible and dramatic expansionist 
adventure." 
 
Palmer