This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 HALIFAX 000040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
COMMERCE FOR 4320/MAC/WH/ON/OIA/BENDER 
DOE FOR INT'L AND POLICY (PDAS DEVITO) AND IE-141 (DEUTSCH) 
OES/EGC (MIOTKE AND DEROSA) 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/BTA EB/ESC/ISC (MCMANUS AND ERVITI), WHA/CAN (WHEELER) 
 
STATE PASS FERC FOR CHAIRMAN WOOD, KEVIN KELLY AND DONALD LEKANG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EPET ENRG ETRD CA
SUBJECT: ATLANTIC CANADA/STATEOF MAINE:  ELECTRIC AND NATURAL GAS 
SUPPLY AND MARKET DEVELOPMENTS 
 
REF: A) 03 OTTAWA 1924; B) 03 OTTAWA 566; C) 03 OTTAWA 503; D) 03 HALIF 
 58; E) 02 OTTAWA 3205 
 
 
SUMMARY/INTRODUCTION 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. Several energy infrastructure projects being contemplated in 
New Brunswick and Nova Scotia promise to bind Atlantic Canada 
further into the northeastern U.S. gas and electric grids, with 
likely benefits for New England energy consumers: 
 
- Refurbishment of NB Power's Point Lepreau nuclear generating 
station (awaiting GoNB political approval). 
 
- Construction of a major power line from Point Lepreau to 
Bangor (awaiting State of Maine approval). 
 
- Break-up of provincially-owned NB Power into five new entities 
(awaiting GoNB legislation).  A long run objective among New 
Brunswick energy leaders is to encourage an integrated electric 
power market covering New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward 
Island and much of northern Maine. 
 
- Proposals for liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminals in both 
provinces (one near Saint John, New Brunswick is expected to 
start construction by June). 
 
- Either LNG terminal, if completed, would require expansion of 
the Maritimes and Northeast Pipeline (M&NE -- which runs from 
offshore Nova Scotia through New England) to approximately twice 
its current capacity. 
 
¶2. Mission ECON staff paid calls on several government and 
industry players in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia during late 
January.  This report, which is based on those conversations, is 
a joint effort of Amconsul Halifax and Amembassy Ottawa. 
 
END SUMMARY/INTRODUCTION 
 
 
ELECTRIC POWER 
-------------- 
 
¶3.  Northern Maine's power grid is closely integrated with that 
of Atlantic Canada.  Bangor Hydro is controlled by Halifax-based 
Emera, the dominant power firm in Nova Scotia.  NB Power 
officials say that the grids in two Maine counties - Aroostook 
and Washington - are in effect "part of the New Brunswick grid." 
 In 2003, NB Power exported roughly 2 terawatt-hours of electric 
power to Maine (net of imports).  Given recent declines in net 
power exports from the rest of Canada, NB Power now accounts for 
around 30 percent of Canada's net power exports to the United 
States.  NB Power has also historically supplied virtually all 
of the power needs of neighboring Prince Edward Island. 
 
¶4.  In New Brunswick, the electric power industry is dominated 
by provincial government-owned NB Power.  NB Power has a mix of 
hydroelectric and fossil-fuel generation plus a single-reactor 
nuclear plant at Point Lepreau, about 30 miles from Calais, 
Maine.  A decision is required soon on whether to replace, 
refurbish, or decommission the 22-year-old reactor. 
 
¶5.  New Brunswick's options for additional generation are 
limited.  Despite the presence of the M&NE pipeline (see below), 
natural gas is not currently available in New Brunswick at 
prices which would make it economic for power generation.  Few 
undeveloped hydroelectric sites are available.  The remaining 
options - burning imported coal or oil - are relatively 
polluting and carbon-emitting.  They are thus likely to conflict 
with the Government of Canada's commitment to implement the 
Kyoto Protocol.  Industry representatives await clarification of 
this policy, which will probably take several more months - 
meanwhile, they summarize this problem in the words "regulatory 
risk". 
 
¶6.  REACTOR RENEWAL:  Provincial government energy officials and 
NB Power executives are currently hanging on a GoNB decision on 
the future of the Point Lepreau nuclear plant.  Regulatory 
approvals are already in place for refurbishment, but the 
financial cost would be high to purchase large amounts of 
replacement power while 380 fuel channels in the reactor core 
are replaced and the turbines and generator are reconditioned. 
 
¶7.  In 2002, citing "no significant economic advantage" from 
refurbishing, provincial regulators recommended against it. 
However, Department of Energy officials believe the arguments in 
favor of refurbishment have strengthened since then, as the 
price outlook for natural gas (the main alternative) is now even 
higher.  Moreover, they say the regulators did not consider the 
value of refurbishment in avoiding future greenhouse gas 
emissions, particularly vis-`-vis coal, which is the lowest-cost 
option.  Finally, the nuclear option has the added attractions - 
particularly for a relatively low-income, high-unemployment 
province - of being both high-technology and relatively 
labor-intensive. 
 
¶8.  Whether or not the GoNB decides to refurbish Point Lepreau, 
building a second reactor at that site is also a possibility. 
Without outside financing, this would be even more costly than 
refurbishment.  The GoNB is exploring the potential for private 
sector participation in either option, and/or for Point Lepreau 
to be a "demonstration site" for the latest reactor design 
offered by Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL).  The latter 
idea is based on hopes that AECL would foot most of the bill - 
but AECL in turn awaits a decision from the GOC, its sole 
shareholder, on options for AECL's future access to financing. 
 
¶9.  TRANSMISSION LINE TO BANGOR:  Whatever happens at Point 
Lepreau, NB Power also hopes to proceed with construction of a 
transmission line from the Lepreau area to the vicinity of 
Bangor, Maine (where the receiving utility, Bangor Hydro, is 
owned by Nova Scotia's Emera Inc).  This line could be completed 
by 2007 and would carry power in either direction depending on 
seasonal and other requirements.  NB Power officials say that 
all approvals still needed are on the U.S. side, and are 
environment-related:  some Maine stakeholders continue to demand 
that the line to follow an existing (but longer) corridor 
farther inland, which would be less economic. 
 
¶10. ELECTRICITY MARKET DEVELOPMENT:  Atlantic Canada and Maine 
are lightly populated and their electric demand is strongly 
winter-peaking.  New Brunswick energy officials expect this 
entire region to have a significant power scarcity problem by 
the winter of 2007-08 due to the shutdown of aging generating 
assets before new plants are built.  Gains in both cost and 
reliability can be expected from integrating the regional grid 
and facilitating power trade with the rest of the U.S. 
Northeast, and this makes up much of New Brunswick's current 
strategy for addressing the scarcity problem.  They add that it 
has the potential to greatly reduce the vulnerability of 
northern Maine to power outages.  (While neighboring Quebec is a 
major exporter of electricity from hydroelectric dams, it has 
few interconnections with New Brunswick and virtually none with 
Maine - and these small markets are a very long way from 
Quebec's reservoirs). 
 
¶11.  As of April 1, 2004, NB Power will be split into five new 
corporate entities (generating, transmission, distribution, 
nuclear, and a holding/services company) plus an Independent 
System Operator (ISO).  NB energy officials told us that, while 
they use U.S. FERC requirements to justify this publicly, they 
are really planning for the anticipated power scarcity in 
2007-2008 - when the new structure will allow them to invite 
proposals from independent power producers.  They also hope to 
share experience/models with counterparts in Nova Scotia, which 
plans to initiate a wholesale power market in 2005.  NB 
officials admit that a really integrated regional power market 
in Atlantic Canada will take "another generation," and that for 
the current decade, they are working toward "seamless" clearing 
of power trades between the provinces' still-separate power 
grids. 
 
NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION 
------------------------ 
 
¶12.  Nova Scotia's offshore Sable Island energy project began 
producing natural gas in early 2000.  Most of this gas is 
transmitted to New England via the Maritimes and Northeast 
Pipeline (MNE), which also has lateral lines serving industries 
near the Strait of Canso plus the urban areas of Halifax, 
Moncton and Saint John.  For more on the prospects for 
production of oil and gas from Atlantic Canada's continental 
shelf, see refs D and E and other reporting from Halifax. 
 
¶13.  The terms on which New Brunswick and Nova Scotia 
communities and industries can access this gas has been a 
sensitive political issue.  Energy exports into the United 
States are licensed by Canada's National Energy Board (NEB), 
which generally defers to market forces.  In order to buy gas 
from the MNE pipeline, Atlantic Canadians must pay prices which 
are tied to short-term markets in the Boston area (minus the 
additional cost of transportation to Boston).  New Brunswick 
interests have two complaints about this system.  First, they 
argue that the Boston-based prices are in some sense "excessive" 
(presumably, this means, higher than they would be if most or 
all of this gas were piped to markets in eastern Canada - which 
was one of the options before MNE was built).  Second, they 
complain that that it has become impossible to purchase MNE gas 
on secure, long-term contracts - which is a prerequisite for New 
Brunswick's industrial needs, and particularly for electric 
power generation. 
 
¶14.  In 2001-2002 the GoNB raised this issue formally with the 
NEB, which declined to take action, other than agreeing to 
"monitor" the gas transmission situation in New Brunswick.  GoNB 
officials remain unapologetic about having raised the issue, 
stressing that it is not a matter of "Canada first" (as their 
position was sometimes characterized in the media) but rather 
"Canada too."  They say they are no longer pressing the issue 
because at current prices, natural gas is simply not a viable 
option for industrial uses or electric power generation in New 
Brunswick.  One event that might change this, they said, would 
be the construction of a liquefied natural gas terminal in 
Atlantic Canada. 
 
¶15.  LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS:  Like other parts of North America, 
Atlantic Canada is hearing proposals to construct terminals 
which would receive liquefied natural gas (LNG) from pressurized 
tanker ships and distribute it on the continental pipeline 
network.  Currently, there are two proposals: 
 
-- Access Northeast Energy Inc. (ane-inc.com), an infrastructure 
development firm, proposes to build an LNG terminal ("Bear 
Head") in an established heavy-industrial zone near Point Tupper 
on the Strait of Canso between mainland Nova Scotia and Cape 
Breton Island.  This site has very good natural features and the 
project enjoys local political support.  The proponent submitted 
environmental applications in 2003. 
 
-- Irving Oil Ltd. (irvingoilco.com), part of a family-owned 
industrial conglomerate which is currently a large buyer/shipper 
of gas on the MNE pipeline, proposes to build an LNG terminal on 
the Bay of Fundy about 5 miles east of Saint John, New 
Brunswick.  While this project is said to be less favored by 
geography (and local politics) than Bear Head, the proponent's 
industrial and financial autonomy may allow it to move ahead 
quickly, perhaps in an effort to pre-empt its competitor. 
Irving Oil says it plans to begin construction during 2004. 
 
¶16.  Either of these projects would require at least a doubling 
in size of the MNE pipeline, and either one would require the 
negotiation of gas supply contracts on a long-term basis in 
order to secure financing for both port and pipeline.  MNE 
representatives say that either project could fit well with 
their plans. 
 
¶17.  New Brunswick energy officials told us that they are open 
to either LNG project, provided New Brunswick buyers obtain 
adequate access to the gas.  They expect either project to 
revive natural gas as a fuel option for industrial development 
in New Brunswick. 
 
CONCLUSION/COMMENT 
------------------ 
 
¶18.  An array of interesting new energy infrastructure projects 
are on the horizon for Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, all of 
which have the potential to significantly benefit neighboring 
U.S. states.  However, we also see the potential for great 
frustration, discord, and disappointment.  The key reason is 
that optimism has consistently run ahead of reality in Atlantic 
Canadian energy developments.  This is painfully evident in Nova 
Scotia's offshore industry, which, thirty years after the first 
resource discoveries, still struggles to deliver on popular 
expectations - particularly with respect to royalty flows.  Part 
of the problem is the multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional 
complexity of offshore regulation in Canada, which makes this 
one of the world's highest-cost areas of active exploration. 
 
¶19.  With respect to LNG ports and natural gas transmission, 
there is little doubt that further development of such 
infrastructure - if it occurs - would heat up a simmering debate 
about local industries' access to natural gas.  In Nova Scotia, 
this issue is moderated by the provincial government's closeness 
to the needs of gas producers, and by the benefit of jobs 
created by gas exploration and production.  New Brunswickers, 
without such offsetting gains, are likely to be irritated by 
news that increasing volumes of gas would transit their province 
en route to New England markets. 
 
¶20.  In electric power, there could be difficult years ahead. 
If New Brunswick cannot or will not finance the refurbishment of 
the Point Lepreau reactor, the prospects for power generation in 
that province will be bleak.  The province could then be on a 
collision course with the GOC's climate change policy - and 
decisions on new fossil-fuelled generating plant will likely be 
slowed and clouded.  The results will affect residents of Maine 
for the rest of this decade. 
 
HILL