This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP DJONES, NEA/PPD DMACINNES AND MQUINN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KMDR KPAO BA
SUBJECT:  DCM RETURNS FROM NAJAF AND ENGAGES BAHRAINI 
AUDIENCES ON IRAQ 
 
¶1.  To further post's goal of convincing Bahraini audiences 
about U.S. goals in Iraq, PAS Manama arranged tailored media 
events for DCM Ford, who recently returned to Bahrain from a 
three month rotation as the CPA Governorate Coordinator in 
Najaf.  Bahrain is a small island and many Embassy contacts 
knew the DCM was in Najaf.  They were curious about his 
experiences there.  Post took advantage of their interest by 
programming him with top media contacts.  He also visited 
political salons (majlises) to renew his acquaintances and 
highlight U.S. work in Iraq.  Notably, younger Bahrainis 
were keenly interested in first-hand observations of the 
changes in Iraq since the war.  (Comment:  These majlises 
are noticeably less hostile than they were last spring.  End 
Comment.) 
 
¶2.  Over an informal breakfast with the editors-in-chief of 
Bahrain's daily newspapers January 13, DCM spoke first-hand 
about the situation in Najaf.  He responded to pointed 
questions about the pace of reconstruction and the steps 
that need to be taken before the CPA hands over sovereignty 
to Iraqis in the summer.  He also highlighted opportunities 
for Bahraini businesses in rebuilding Iraq.  At a reception 
in the DCMR with Bahraini journalists and columnists January 
14, Ford responded to numerous questions, and considerable 
doubts, about the daily lives of Iraqis and U.S. hopes for a 
democratic Iraq. 
 
¶3.  Ford's outreach activities paid off.  "Akhbar Al 
Khaleej," a daily Arabic newspaper which strongly opposed 
the war and continues to regularly question U.S. intentions 
in Iraq, finally carried a positive article on January 14. 
Its headline: "The American Deputy Ambassador:  We are 
Committed to Hand Over a Democratic and Just Regime to the 
Iraqis."  The editor-in-chief thanked the PAO profusely for 
inviting him to "chat" with Ford, and he stressed that his 
newspaper is not "anti-American" and that he welcomes such 
dialogues.  Another leading Arabic daily, al-Wasat, carried 
on January 14 a prominent story on an inside page reporting 
DCM's remarks about the potential for Bahraini companies in 
Iraq and the progress CPA has made setting up more 
representative local government. 
 
¶4.  Comment:  First hand knowledge about Iraq, combined with 
Arabic language skills, made DCM a particularly effective 
interlocutor with Bahraini media and groups.  When our young 
Arab-American APAO returns from a five month rotation in 
Iraq next month, we plan to program him at the University of 
Bahrain and with youth groups.  Post recommends that other 
posts consider programming officers upon return from similar 
rotations in Iraq. 
 
NEUMANN