This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2014 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL PGOV ASEC IZ HO
SUBJECT: TASK FORCE XATRUCH I RETURNS AS HONDURAN ARMED 
FORCES PROUDLY CELEBRATE THEIR ROLE IN OPERATION IRAQI 
FREEDOM 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 234 
     ¶B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 101921Z 04 
     ¶C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2249 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 ¶1. (U)  Summary:  On February 20, the Government of Honduras 
(GOH) celebrated the return of Task Force Xatruch I (TFXI), 
the 370-man contingent the GOH deployed to Iraq in support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), with full honors and a 
military parade.  Final elements of TFXI arrived in Honduras 
February 19, accompanied by TFXI commander Coronel Carlos 
Andino Cobos.  TFXI had been deployed to Iraq since August 
¶2003.  Task Force Xatruch II, commanded by Colonel Wilfredo 
Calderon Canales, arrived in Iraq in mid-February with a 
scheduled deployment of six months.  Per ref A, Post believes 
the GOH can be persuaded to authorize a second one-year 
deployment, barring any unforeseen major complications in 
Iraq.   End Summary 
 
¶2. (U) On February 20, the Government of Honduras (GOH) 
celebrated the return of TFXI, the 370-man contingent the GOH 
deployed to Iraq in support of OIF, with full honors and a 
military parade.  Final elements of TFXI arrived in Honduras 
February 19, accompanied by TFXI commander Coronel Carlos 
Andino Cobos.  TFXI had been deployed to Iraq since August 
¶2003.  Present for the ceremony were Honduran Minister of 
Defense (MOD) Federico Breve, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff General Jose Isaias Barahona (CJCS), AMB, Spanish 
Ambassador to Hondura, SOUTHCOM representative General 
Jelinski, and many other high level members of the GOH, the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HAF), and members of the diplomatic 
community.  Post assisted the GOH in organizing the event by 
providing part of the refreshments for the returning troops 
and their family members. 
 
¶3. (SBU) While the deployment remains controversial (ref A), 
Hondurans in general are very proud of their returning 
troops.  All members of TFXI were given medals, and many 
mentioned that they would be like to return to Iraq for a 
second tour.  The Honduran press fully covered the event, 
with the primary focus being on the reunification of families 
and the successful completion of the first deployment. 
TFXI's successful mission appears to have boosted the overall 
morale of the HAF as well as its standing in Honduran society. 
 
¶4. (U) In public remarks, MOD Breve praised the valor of 
Honduran troops, saying that "all of Honduras was proud of 
their Armed Forces for being prepared, disciplined, and for 
successfully completing their mission to Iraq."  CJCS 
Barahona also congratulated the soldiers for a job well done, 
stating that Honduras and the world was grateful for their 
contribution toward peace and stability in Iraq. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  The HAF will likely extend its commitment in 
Iraq if called upon (ref A & B).  Recent visits by high level 
USG officials, coupled with expectations of significant 
increases in military and other assistance, have given the 
Maduro administration a needed political boost. Rhetorical 
commitments aside, however, Honduras' dedication to support 
OIF is certainly contingent upon TFXII not sustaining 
casualties.  Any political capital the Maduro administration 
has accumulated regarding the deployment would likely vanish 
overnight, even if only a handful of soldiers were to lose 
their lives.  If casualties were to occur, the opposition 
Liberal Party (which has consistently opposed the deployment) 
would also paint Maduro as a "dupe," of the USG, by 
needlessly putting Honduran troops in harms way.  Should this 
occur, it could also have serious repercussions for upcoming 
presidential elections in 2005.  End Comment. 
PALMER