This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000615 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JANUARY 30, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Annan opposes new mediator for Cyprus - Sabah 
Powell regards himself as `problem solver' for Cyprus - 
Sabah 
Powell: Wait until Spring for US action against PKK - 
Hurriyet 
Papadopoulos urges Annan to start Cyprus talks - Milliyet 
Powell asks Annan to put pressure on Greek Cypriots - 
Turkiye 
429 Arabs released for Tannenbaum - Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Athens, Greek Cypriots face significant US pressure - 
Radikal 
Powell believes solution in Cyprus near - Yeni Safak 
Erdogan: Turkey will be a leader for change in Muslim world 
- Radikal 
Turkey urges US economic cooperation in Iraq - Yeni Safak 
Jerusalem bloodbath - Radikal 
Prisoner swap in Middle East - Cumhuriyet 
Israel releases 429 Palestinians - Yeni Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Erdogan in US:  Mainstream media and Islamist papers in 
Turkey agree that Erdogan's US visit has been successful in 
repairing the strain in bilateral relations and in gaining 
promises from the Americans regarding the elimination of the 
PKK presence in northern Iraq and opposition to a 
prospective Kurdish state.  Papers also note that the United 
States is exerting significant pressure on Greece and the 
Greek Cypriots to return to the bargaining table on Cyprus 
following the recent Turkish initiative with the UN 
Secretary General.  However, "Cumhuriyet" believes that 
 
SIPDIS 
Erdogan made no concrete gains on his US trip.  Erdogan was 
received `like a leader of a third world country,' according 
to "Cumhuriyet."  The paper complains that Turkish 
businessmen are returning home `empty-handed.'  "Cumhuriyet" 
also claims that Turkey suffered a setback on Cyprus when 
Secretary Powell declined the Turkish proposal that he serve 
 
SIPDIS 
as a mediator in the Cyprus talks. 
 
 
Powell, Gul press conference:  At a joint press conference 
following a meeting with FM Gul, Secretary of State Powell 
urged Ankara to wait until April or May to see US action 
against PKK militants who refuse to take advantage of the 
amnesty law offered by the Turkish government for members of 
terrorist organizations.  Powell noted that the US would 
resist plans for an independent Kurdistan.  He voiced hope 
to see the Cyprus issue resolved before May.  Powell is 
reluctant to become a `facilitator' for Cyprus given his 
already-full schedule in his duties as Secretary.  Foreign 
Minister Gul said Turkey wants Powell to intervene in the 
Cyprus negotiations only in the event of a deadlock. 
 
 
Cyprus:  UN Secretary General Annan said on Thursday that 
the appointment of Secretary Powell as a `mediator' or 
`facilitator' for Cyprus was out of the question.  `Powell 
already has a post in which he is quite busy,' Annan said. 
Annan reiterated support for UN Cyprus envoy Alvaro De Soto, 
who knows the Cyprus issue in detail.  President Bush is 
expected to write a letter to Greek Cypriot leader 
Papadopolous, urging the Greek Cypriots to follow the steps 
forward taken by the Turkish government.  Meanwhile, EU 
expansion commissioner Verheugen said that it is not Turkey 
but `some other countries' that are against a solution in 
Cyprus.  Verheugen did not elaborate. 
 
 
Distressed with TABA, US founds new association:  A "Sabah" 
column claims that the end is nearing for the Turkish- 
American Business Association (TABA).  Many US companies are 
no longer willing to be represented by TABA and have left 
the association in search of a new organization which would 
help US businessmen in Turkey.  US Embassy Ankara has pushed 
the button for the establishment of the American Business 
Forum (ABF) following long months of preparation.  The new 
association will be announced by Ambassador Edelman on 
January 17.  About 50 US companies have already registered 
with the ABF, "Sabah" reports. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: US-TURKEY 
 
 
"Courting with the US" 
Mehmet Ocaktan warned in the Islamist Yeni Safak (1/30): 
"There is a general impression that Turkey is making 
important progress toward its EU vision after the talks in 
Washington.  Yet we should also remember that in the past 
the Europeans were not very welcoming toward American 
efforts to ensure Turkey's EU accession.  It remains to be 
seen whether an American facilitative role this time will 
work with the EU.  There is still a possibility, however, 
that Turkey will lose its chance to receive a date from the 
EU in December 2004.  The fact of the matter is that 
Turkey's EU accession is not a real priority for Washington. 
The US cares more about its `Greater America Project' in the 
Middle East, and the real priority is to determine where 
Turkey stands in that respect. . The timing of the great new 
affection between Ankara and Washington is actually a cause 
for concern because of the US intention to become a world 
empire.  This is not a great help for Turkey's EU vision. 
Let's bear in mind that the whole region is going to remain 
unstable for a long time to come, and the US is not going to 
give up its invasion plans in the Islamic world.  In short, 
flirting with the US is like a dead-end for Turkey." 
 
 
"Meeting at the White House" 
Yilmaz Oztuna commented in the conservative Turkiye (1/30): 
"The meeting created an opportunity to discuss very 
important issues in an extensive format, including Iraq, 
Cyprus and PKK terrorism.  It would be wrong to describe 
what President Bush said to PM Erdogan as `vague.' 
Washington made some very important commitments for Iraq's 
territorial integrity as well as the fate of PKK members in 
northern Iraq. 
Washington seems very determined to maintain full-scale 
relations with Turkey as an ally.  Differences might appear 
in some of the rhetoric on Iraq, but this does not mean that 
the US is trying to cheat Turkey.  It stems from the fact 
that the US did not draw up a final plan for Iraq's future. 
. The US-Turkey alliance in the fight against terrorism is a 
shining example of why we should be optimistic about the 
future of mankind." 
 
 
DEUTSCH