This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL PTER ASEC PBTS SA YM COUNTER TERRORISM ECON COM
SUBJECT: BEHIND THE SCENES ON YEMEN-SAUDI BORDER COOPERATION 
 
REF: A. SANAA 381 
     ¶B. RIYADH 822 
     ¶C. FBIS GMP 2004022200185 
 
Classified By: DCM Alan G. Misenheimer for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (s) Summary: President Saleh told CDA on February 19 that 
DCI George Tenent played a major role in facilitating the new 
border agreement between Saudi Arabia and Yemen.  Both 
countries agreed to halt new construction and begin joint 
Ministry of Interior patrols.  A resolution was a political 
necessity for Saleh who likely felt pressure from tribes who 
had lost lucrative cross-border trade after the barriers were 
erected.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Saleh: Tenent's Role Important 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (s) On the margins of President Saleh's February 19 
meeting with members of a congressional staff delegation in 
the port city of Mukallah, CDA congratulated Saleh on his 
successful Feb 17/18 trip to Saudi Arabia.  Saleh replied, 
"George Tenent spoke with the Saudis two days before me, and 
his role was important."  (NFI) Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Planning and International Cooperation Ahmed 
Sofan also told CDA that Saleh was pleased with the DCI's 
role. 
 
¶3. (s) Later that same day, FM Abubakr al-Qirbi told CDA that 
"Saleh had to go" to Saudi Arabia, adding that Saleh's 
successful negotiations with Crown Prince Abdullah was a 
significant step for Yemen.  Echoing comments by DPM Sofan, 
Qirbi said Saleh found Abdullah "unaware" of this issue, but 
once notified was immediately responsive to ROYG concerns. 
In a separate conversation on the return flight from 
Mukallah, Deputy Foreign Minister Mustafa Noman privately 
questioned the explanation, and wondered out loud how 
Abdullah could be unaware of an 8 million USD expenditure. 
He commented that Yemen was obliged to accept the Saudi 
position as stated. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
ROYG: Despite Loopholes Claimed by Saudis, 
Construction Violates Jeddah Agreement 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (s) DFM Noman described Saudi construction as complying in 
the "technical sense" of the Jeddah Agreement because the 
agreement prohibits any construction in the 20 km border area 
that obscures vision across the landscape.  The Saudi 
position, according to Noman, is that the construction of 
pipes anchored vertically in the ground and linked by wire 
does not impede vision and thus is permissible under the 
agreement.  Noman stressed that the ROYG believes that the 
Saudi position is disingenuous because the barriers clearly 
violate both the spirit and the letter of the agreement. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Solution: Cessation of Construction and Joint Patrols 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. (s) DFM Noman said the agreement includes a freeze on 
Saudi construction (no dismantling of existing structures), 
and upcoming talks will work out details for stepped-up joint 
patrols that will stop smuggling "and render the barriers 
unnecessary."  However, in an interview with al-Arabiyya (ref 
c), Saleh claimed that barriers would be dismantled.  Many 
papers Yemeni repeated this claim.  Saleh also said further 
negotiations would be conducted by the Ministries of 
Interiors.  In a 2/23 meeting, MFA Director of the Arab World 
Department Abdullah Matar told Pol/Econ Chief that an 
agreement had been signed by both Interior Ministers, but 
that the issue of whether to cease construction and/or 
dismantle the barriers was not decided, but would be worked 
out by "committees," 
 
¶6. (s) DPM Sofan underscored the political necessity of an 
agreement for the ROYG.  He said that the Saudi barrier 
stopped legitimate cross-border movement by tribes on both 
sides of the border.  Sofan said they were not engaged in 
smuggling per se, i.e. they were not smuggling arms, 
explosives or facilitating the transit of terrorists.  But, 
Sofan reiterated, their ability to move freely across the 
border is vital to the tribes.  Sofan commented that Saleh 
was compelled to intervene directly when talks by the 
Interior Minister and Foreign Minister failed to yield any 
progress at all. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Comment: Balancing Security and Economic Needs 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. (s) Comment:  While the ROYG and the SAG have not yet 
completely resolved their differences over the Saudi's 
construction of barriers, the defusing of this dispute is a 
step forward for Yemeni/SAG cooperation (ref b).  While the 
tribes described by DPM Sofan may or may not be smuggling 
arms, they are likely trafficking household goods, foodstuffs 
and cars, which provide the livelihood for many border tribes 
and businessmen throughout the country.  DPM Sofan clearly 
implied that the tribes put pressure on Saleh to pursue a 
resolution and future cooperation will have to continue to 
balance political, economic and security needs for both 
countries.  End comment. 
HULL