This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T THE HAGUE 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2014 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL PTER AF NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH ON PRTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 30871 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 248 
     ¶C. THE HAGUE 281 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR CLIFFORD M. SOBEL FOR REASONS 1 
.5 (B AND D). 
 
¶1. (S) PM Balkenende's Foreign Policy Advisor Rob Swartbol 
informed Amb. Sobel on February 12 that, following FM Bot's 
trip to Washington, the Dutch government was actively 
considering participating in a PRT in Afghanistan.  The 
options under consideration include possibly joining the 
Germans, Scandinavians, or  British in their operations. 
Separately, Dutch MOD J-3 Air Commodore Pieter Cobelens 
informed DATT also on February 12 that FM Bot and Defense 
Minister Kamp are expected to meet on February 20 to discuss 
Dutch PRT participation and possible deployment of SOF to 
Afghanistan in support of OEF.  As reported ref B, there 
remains stronger support for the latter option within the 
uniformed services.  Dutch MOD and MFA action levels remain 
noncomittal towards possible Dutch PRT participation. 
 
¶2. (S)  Comment:  When the defense and foreign affairs 
ministers meet, they will be balancing a desire to do their 
fair share in Afghanistan against some deep seated concerns 
in parliament and government.  As noted Ref C, the idea of a 
PRT conjures for some the worst memories of Srebrenica. If 
the Dutch government is to gain consensus to participate in a 
PRT, it will have to ease these concerns, especially about in 
extremis extraction.  This week, the government saw some 
encouraging signs in parliament: leaders they sounded out 
were more positive towards a PRT than expected, and 
parliament easily concurred with the government's decision to 
deploy Apache helicopters in Afghanistan.  The government 
will also have to overcome concerns about costs, including 
from powerful Finance Minister Gerrit Zalm.  As one MFA 
official said after FM Bot's visit to Washington, the GONL 
was "not negative" on taking on a PRT, but "there's a lot to 
be clarified."  The top levels of the Dutch government seem 
more energized than a week ago, but this is a process of 
trying to build consensus. 
 
SOBEL