This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR AND NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AMGT
SUBJECT:  MESSAGE FROM BAHRAIN'S PRIME MINISTER TO SECRETARY 
OF STATE COLIN L. POWELL 
 
 
On February 16, 2004, post received the following diplomatic 
note from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which enclosed a 
letter from the office of the Prime Minister to the 
Secretary. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Begin text of the diplomatic note: 
 
Kingdom of Bahrain 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
Ref: 16/2/6-10039 
Dated 2/4/2004 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America in the Kingdom, and is pleased to attach a letter 
from His Highness Shaikh Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa, the 
Prime Minister, to His Excellency Mr. Colin L. Powell, 
Secretary of State of the United States of America. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
The Ministry requests that the Embassy would secure the 
delivery of the attached letter to the concerned authority. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
takes this opportunity to renew to the Embassy the assurance 
of its highest consideration. 
 
End text of diplomatic note. 
 
Begin text of the letter: 
 
4 February 2004 
 
His Excellency Mr. Colin L. Powell 
Secretary of State 
 
SIPDIS 
United States of America 
 
Your Excellency, 
 
I have received with great pleasure your kind 
congratulations on the occasion of Eid Al-Adha.  I send you 
my deep thanks for your kind sentiments, which I highly 
appreciate and deeply cherish. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank your 
Excellency for your kind words on the relations between our 
two friendly nations, and to stress that the Kingdom of 
Bahrain attaches a great importance to enhancing all means 
of cooperation with the United States of America, 
particularly its valuable economic and trade relations. 
 
May I thank you once again for your kind congratulations, 
and in confidence that the ties between our two countries 
will continue to flourish, I send you my warmest wishes for 
your continued good health and happiness and for the 
continued progress and prosperity of the United States of 
America. 
 
Sincerely, 
Khalifa bin Salman Al-Khalifa 
Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
 
End text of letter. 
 
(U) Post sent the original letter via Unclassified Pouch, 
registration #3882708, on February 17 to NEA/ARP (Claire 
Kaneshiro) to deliver to S/ES-CR 
 
 
 
FORD