This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 001017 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS JO ICJ
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON JORDAN'S SUBMISSION TO THE ICJ CASE ON 
ISRAEL'S SEPARATION BARRIER 
 
 
Classified By: DCM David Hale for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
Â¶1.  (C)   MFA Legal Department head Samer Naber told PolCouns 
and PolOff February 9 that Jordan has not yet decided whether 
it will make an oral presentation to the International Court 
of Justice (ICJ) on the Israeli security barrier. 
Nevertheless, it will likely request from the court 
permission to give an oral statement before the February 13 
deadline to preserve its right to make an oral argument 
should it choose to do so.  Should Jordan give an oral 
argument, Naber said that he, Jordanian Permanent 
Representative to the UN Prince Zaid bin Raad, the Jordanian 
UN Mission Legal Advisor, and a prominent British attorney 
named Sir Arthur Watts would collaborate.  Naber commented 
that he had spent a great deal of time reviewing the legal 
briefs submitted in the ICJ case, and complimented both the 
U.S. and Israeli submissions as complete and well presented. 
He said the good briefs from the U.S. and Israel had made him 
work harder to refine Jordan's legal brief. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM