This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000213 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/B 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2014 
TAGS: PINR PREL PM RS POLITICS FOREIGN POLICY
SUBJECT: RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR NIKOLAY VLADIMIR DEPARTS 
PANAMA, SLATED TO BE NORTH AMERICAN AFFAIRS DIRECTOR IN 
RUSSIAN MFA 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Linda E. Watt for Reasons 1.5 (b) & (d) 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) This biographical report details Ambassador and 
Emboffs' impressions of Nikolay Vladimir during his tenure as 
Russian Ambassador to Panama as well as the highlights of his 
Curriculum Vitae.  Ambassador Vladimir departed Panama in 
December 2003, informing Ambassador Watt that he had been 
selected to head the MFA's North American directorate, an 
appointment he characterized as a great privilege to which he 
looks forward enthusiastically. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Born in 1947 and bearing the diplomatic rank of Envoy 
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, First Class, Nikolay 
Mikhailovich Vladimir entered the Soviet Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs in 1974.  He graduated in 1970 from the Moscow State 
Institute for International Relations (now MGIMO-Univ.) and 
in 1982 from the Diplomatic Academy, both under the USSR MFA. 
Vladimir served twice as in the Soviet Embassy in Hungary 
(1974-80, 1989-94) and also in the Soviet Embassy in Cuba 
(1982-85). 
 
 
¶3. (U) Most recently, Vladimir served as Russian Ambassador 
to Panama from August 2000 through December 2003.  Vladimir's 
most recent positions of note are: Deputy Director of MFA 
North America Department (1996-98), Ambassador to Jamaica, 
and non resident Ambassador to Antigua and Barbuda, later to 
the Commonwealth of Dominica (1998-2000). 
 
 
¶4. (C) Vladimir spent most of his term in Panama without his 
family, though his wife made occasional visits.  Mrs. 
Vladimir, who speaks good English, was caring for elderly 
parents in Russia, precluding her from accompanying her 
husband to Panama. Vladimir occasionally visited his wife and 
two adult children (one son, one daughter) in Russia.  His 
son works on non-proliferation issues at MFA 
 
 
¶5. (C) Vladimir speaks excellent Spanish and English.  He was 
active in Panama diplomatic social scene.  He was an active 
promoter of Russian economic interests in Panama.  As such, 
he arranged the visit of a large delegation of Russian 
businessmen to Panama and, near the time of his departure, 
was working on a reciprocal visit to Russia by leading 
Panamanian diplomats.  Vladimir was a popular member of the 
diplomatic corps in Panama, largely due to his easygoing and 
affable personality.  He showed special interest in the U.S., 
seeking out Embassy officers to discuss bilateral relations 
which he invariably cast in a positive light (even during the 
Iraq war when he highlighted mutual U.S./Panamanian interests 
in a stable Iraq). 
 
 
¶6. (C) Vladimir promoted a successful bilateral 
anti-money-laundering agreement, and coordinated the visit to 
Russia of the Panamanian Foreign Minister, Director of the 
Maritime Authority, and other senior officials to sign a 
reciprocal agreement on maritime issues.  He presided over 
the November 2003 groundbreaking ceremony for a large new 
Russian Embassy in Panama. 
 
 
¶7. (C) Vladimir consistently expressed great affection for 
the U.S., recalling in particular the month he spent at the 
University of Georgia in Athens in the mid-nineties.  He has 
traveled extensively in the U.S. as a member of official 
delegations. 
 
 
WATT