This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 000469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PRM/ANE FOR R.WARD 
EUR/UBI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID KPAL NL PREF UNRWA
SUBJECT: DUTCH RESPONSE TO UNRWA EMERGENCY APPEAL 
 
REF: STATE 29074 
 
¶1.     The Netherlands does not plan to contribute to the 
2004 Emergency Appeal for the UN Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA).  Ms. Marwiencke Tillema of the 
MFA's UN Directorate (Political and Judicial Division) said 
the Dutch decision is based on two factors.  First, the Dutch 
want to see a broader base of donors to the UNRWA.  The Dutch 
feel the agency should not rely on the support of traditional 
donors.  She suggested that UNRWA approach new donors 
including those in the Middle East region.  Tillema noted 
that the Nordic countries have also indicated they would like 
to see more donors.  A second reason the Dutch will not 
contribute is their lack of extra funds.  According to Joost 
Andriessen, Director of the MFA's Humanitarian Division, the 
Ministry has several multi-year commitments to UN agencies 
which they cannot easily cut and they are experiencing a 
squeeze in their overall bilateral and humanitarian aid 
funding due to a tight budget. 
 
¶2.     In 2004 the Dutch will give an unearmarked EUR 11.8 
million to UNRWA's general budget.  The MFA expects the money 
to be disbursed in late March.  This is the same amount the 
Netherlands gave in 2003. 
SOBEL