This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP (LINDERMAN), WHA/PPC (FALLS), WHA/CAR 
(MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL KJUS SMIG DR
SUBJECT: ALIEN SMUGGLING TRIAL FOR DOMINICAN CONGRESSMAN 
POSTPONED AGAIN 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 7094 
 
¶1. (SBU) Trial proceedings against accused alien smuggler 
Congressman Guillermo Radhames Ramos Garcia were postponed 
again on January 28 after his lawyer failed to appear in 
court.  Lawyers for the two co-defendants did not appear 
either.  The trial will resume at the Supreme Court on March 
¶24.  Additionally, a bail hearing for the two Asian 
co-defendants is scheduled for February 5. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On January 20 Attorney General Victor Cespedes 
recommended bail be set for the two Asian co-defendants at 
100,000 pesos each.  Each defendant would be required to post 
2 per cent of that amount, approximately 40 USD. The Court 
adjourned without acting on the bail recommendation. 
Newspaper reports indicate that there was sharp disagreement 
among the justices on this subject, both in open session and 
afterwards in chambers. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Comment: This most recent postponement of the 
Radhames Ramos Garcia case is the second in just two months. 
The Attorney General's suggested bail amount is unusually 
low.  EcoPol counselor called on the AG on January 22 to 
express concern that once set free on bail, these defendants 
would flee the country and thereby undermine the case. 
Cespedes was categoric to EcoPol Counselor and the next day 
to the Ambassador during an unrelated ceremony: he says that 
the case is a strong one, with documentary evidence and other 
witnesses, and that the co-defendants are not needed. 
Cespedes said that his office will continue the prosecution 
and expects to achieve a conviction. 
HERTELL