This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 000399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE PASS FOR G/TIP/LINDERMAN/HOLLIDAY 
WHA/PPC/FALLS, WHA/CEN/BRIGHAM 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL SMIG PM KTIP LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: FOCUSING PANAMA'S EFFORT TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS (TIP) 
 
REF: A. 03 PANAMA 3170 
     ¶B. PANAMA 229 
     ¶C. 03 STATE 305932 
 
 
-------- 
 SUMMARY 
 -------- 
¶1. (SBU)  The January 18-21 G/TIP visit to Panama helped 
refine Embassy and GOP anti-TIP efforts approach to 
strategies (Ref A).  The Embassy will push the GOP to focus 
its anti-TIP improvements on public awareness campaigns, 
victims assistance, and increased training.  In the short 
term, legislation to update and strengthen anti-TIP and 
anti-child pornography statutes and to eliminate sex-worker 
("alternadora") visas for Colombians theoretically could be 
passed in the March legislative session.  However, the 
upcoming May 2 elections could slow Embassy and GOP efforts. 
The recent bust of a child prostitution ring (Ref B) and 
attendant publicity provides an opportunity to move Panama 
"ahead of the curve" combating both TIP and the broader issue 
of child sexual exploitation.  End Summary. 
 
 
------------------------ 
INFORMATIVE G/TIP VISIT 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Embassy used the January 18-21 investigative trip 
of G/TIP officer Phillip Linderman to develop an abundance of 
information for G/TIP, Embassy, GOP officials, and others. 
Linderman shared the Washington perspective on TIP with a 
diverse audience.  Panama likely surpasses G/TIP's informal 
100 victims threshold; on the other hand, meetings with 
various GOP officials demonstrated that the GOP is willing to 
address the issue.  GOP efforts are hampered by a lack of 
resources.  Several NGOs are combating TIP, especially 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors, within the broader 
context of stopping forced child labor. 
 
 
------------------- 
AHEAD OF THE CURVE 
------------------- 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Embassy TIP working group (POL, NAS, INS, Customs, 
CONS), chaired by DCM, meet on January 29 to discuss findings 
and to map updated Embassy anti-TIP strategies (Ref A).  The 
working group's agreed that GOP efforts to combat TIP can be 
improved by: A) improving training, B) strengthening victim 
assistance C) starting a public education campaign, and D) 
proposing legislative changes.  Training, victims assistance, 
and educational campaigns, and legislation are viable 
near-term goals. 
 
 
---------------------- 
WE WANT TO LEARN MORE 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  A common refrain heard from the GOP and NGOs is 
the desire for more training.  Currently, two USG-sponsored 
training sessions are planned.  The "Paul and Lisa" training, 
partially subsidized by G/TIP (REF C), will bring together a 
diverse group of GOP officials, NGOs, and the press.  The 
training will be held in late March 2004 and will focus on 
identifying and preventing of TIP.  The Department of Justice 
(DOJ) is planning anti-TIP training in Panama for early 
summer 2004.  The training would focus on the legal issues 
related to combating TIP.  In addition, DHS/ICE are active in 
training focused on sexual exploitation of minors via the 
Internet and identifying potential TIP victims in transit to 
and/or through Panama. 
 
 
--------------- 
A PLACE TO TURN 
--------------- 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  TIP victims and/or those who know them need a 
place to report this crime.  A victims' hot line is just such 
a place.  The Embassy TIP working group believes that the hot 
line should operated by a NGO or independent GOP agency (i.e. 
the Ombudsman).  A hot line separate from the GOP is less 
likely to be manipulated for policy or political reasons. 
Funding for such a hot line would be a joint venture between 
the GOP and the Embassy, using NAS funds. 
 
 
----------------------- 
MAKING THE PUBLIC AWARE 
----------------------- 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  A public education/awareness campaign on TIP makes 
a good link with a victims hot line.  PTJ detectives already 
conduct informal sessions at schools and universities. 
Embassy support for a GOP TIP public relations campaign will 
expand to a broader public relations campaign.  Print and 
visual media will be used.  State, INS, and Customs brochures 
and other informational resources will be included in this 
campaign.  Embassy also plans to work with high-level GOP 
officials on public announcements and speeches that will help 
Panamanians further understand the importance of stopping 
TIP. 
 
 
---------------- 
TOUGHENING LAWS 
---------------- 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Legislative and statutory changes are proposed for 
anti-TIP, anti-child pornography and immigration laws. 
Panama's current anti-TIP statues can hamper investigations 
because of the need for a formal complaint.  Current 
proposals would eliminate that provision, and strengthen 
other parts of the law.  To reinforce the anti-child 
pornography law, a broad cross-section of the GOP and civil 
society proposed a new law to update the definitions of child 
pornography and prostitution.  Increased jail sentences and 
acknowledgment of the pervasive effects of the Internet in 
child pornography and prostitution are contained in this 
proposal.  Finally, as part of a sweeping change in 
immigration policy, the director of Immigration is proposing 
to eliminate the sex worker ("alternadora") visa program. 
(NOTE:  The "alternadora" visa is granted to approximately 
400-500 Colombian women annually to work in the sex trade in 
Panama.  End note.).  A limiting factor is the current 
election season, but the upcoming March legislative session 
could provide an opportunity to turn at least some of these 
proposals into law. 
 
 
----------------- 
BROADER CHALLENGE 
----------------- 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Sexual exploitation of minors is not limited to 
TIP-related circumstances.  Poverty, drug abuse, alcoholism, 
and a "keep quiet" culture all contribute to child sexual 
exploitation and abuse.  Embassy believes a broader 
perspective is needed to address this issue.  Legitimate 
questions are raised about why the USG focuses so much time 
and effort in Panama on TIP when it likely affects relatively 
few (50-100) children.  Panama faces a much larger problem of 
sexual abuse within families and communities that has no 
commercial context and the effects on young minds and bodies 
is no less devastating.  The importance of combating TIP 
cannot be understated but applying our full efforts to 
problems that take deeper root and are more widespread in 
Panama might prove to be a more effective use of USG funds 
and time. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Panama is fighting TIP and already has a good 
anti-TIP base.  GOP and Embassy near-term goals of enhanced 
training, victims assistance, and educational campaigns will 
help place Panama ahead of the anti-TIP curve.  Strengthening 
anti-TIP and anti-child pornography statutes, as well as 
eliminating sex worker ("alternadora") visas are ambitious 
but realistic goals as legislators broadly support these 
ideas.  Embassy believes that a broader perspective and 
action plan to combat child sexual exploitation is needed. 
As the recent dismantling of a child prostitution ring shows 
(Ref B), the GOP can and will take action against TIP.  With 
USG support, the GOP and Panamanian NGOs can take further 
action to ensure Panama limits the spread of TIP reduces its 
scope. 
 
 
WATT