This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 000959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM PREL KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB TU
SUBJECT: PRESSING TURKISH MFA ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 127 
 
 
¶1. (U) Jan. 27 Polcouns and Poloff paid introductory call 
Haldun Otman, newly-appointed MFA Deputy Director General of 
Consular Affairs, to press the GOT to follow through on 
recent efforts to combat trafficking in persons (TIP). 
Polcouns noted that the USG last year upgraded Turkey from 
Tier III to Tier II in the annual TIP Report based on a 
number of late GOT initiatives.  The GOT must follow up on 
these initiatives in order to maintain progress against TIP 
and remain in Tier II.  A return to Tier III could trigger 
USG economic sanctions.  Polcouns noted that the GOT in 
September 2003 signed an anti-TIP protocol with the Human 
Resources Development Foundation (HRDF), an Istanbul-based 
NGO, that included shelters, a voluntary repatriation 
program, and training.  MFA officials have explained to the 
Embassy (reftel) that neither the GOT nor HRDF have been able 
to secure funding for the protocol, but the GOT needs to find 
a way to begin implementing it.  In addition, the USG this 
year will need detailed information about arrests, 
prosecutions, and sentencing in TIP-related trials. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Otman replied that the GOT takes TIP seriously and is 
working to expand its efforts to combat trafficking.  Noting 
that the USG re-evaluated Turkey and upgraded it to Tier II 
recently -- in September 2003 -- Otman averred that the GOT 
needs time to implement the latest anti-TIP initiatives.  For 
example, GOT officials are currently examining options for 
opening a shelter for TIP victims. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Poloff noted that the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) recently submitted to the GOT a USD 1.2 
million pilot project that would include shelters, training, 
and a voluntary repatriation program.  IOM is seeking 
international donors for the plan.  The project would allow 
the GOT to move forward on the commitments of the protocol it 
signed with HRDF.  Otman said the GOT is reviewing the IOM 
proposal, but needs to resolve a number of issues before 
deciding whether to proceed.  For example, some elements of 
the GOT question why IOM insists that its staff accompany 
voluntary returnees all the way to the airplane.  Poloff said 
this is consistent with IOM procedures worldwide; IOM must 
accompany returnees to ensure the returns are voluntary. 
Otman said MFA is verifying whether other countries allow IOM 
such access.  MFA supports the IOM project, but needs more 
information in order to convince other ministries. 
EDELMAN