This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

300932Z Jan 04UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SECSTATE FOR DS/IP/SA AND DS/DSS/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC NP PTER
SUBJECT: DEMONSTRATORS JUMP FENCE AT KATHMANDU EMR TO AVOID 
POLICE 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) At approximately 4:30 PM local time US Embassy 
Kathmandu local guards reported three local males sighted 
jumping over the Embassy Main Residence (EMR) fence on the 
south side.  The trespassers were apprehended immediately and 
ordered to come along quietly by the local guards at the 
residence and complied without resistance.  The three 
individuals were believed to be part of the large 
demonstration broken up by the local police shortly before. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The ARSO and Senior FSNI responded to the scene 
immediately and interviewed the three males.  After 
questioning, both were convinced that the three were fleeing 
police who were using water cannons and tear gas to break up 
the crowd of protesters who where demonstrating in the Ratna 
Park area nearby and had no idea they were entering the 
Ambassador's Compound. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The three individuals were described as Nepalese 
college students between the ages of eighteen to twenty five. 
 RSO has full names and biodata obtained from the subjects, 
who provided college ID cards as identification, and will 
conduct appropriate name checks. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The trespassers were released into the custody of 
local police officers outside the EMR who were asked to 
escort them out of the area and release them.  Local police 
were further instructed that the US Mission did not want to 
press charges against the suspects at this time. 
 
¶5. (U) RSO point of contact is RSO James W. Gayhart (997) 
441-1179 ext 4680. 
MALINOWSKI