This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS CASC IZ VM
SUBJECT:  TFIZ01:  VIETNAM UPDATE MARCH 21 
 
REF:  A.  HANOI 0684  B. HANOI 0676  C.  HANOI 0651 
 
¶1.  (U)  Vietnamese television, radio, and newspapers on 
March 20 and March 21 highlighted international protests 
against military action in Iraq, including another slew of 
mass pro-peace "meetings" throughout Vietnam that were 
described as involving at least tens of thousands of 
Vietnamese citizens in various locations.  However, coverage 
was virtually non-existent of the very small student 
protests across the street from the Chancery on March 19 and 
March 20.  (Comment:  Failure to publicize these protests 
may indicate that they did not have any official sanction 
and that the GVN does not want to encourage any spontaneous 
demonstrations on this or other issues.  End comment) 
 
¶2.  (U)  Media also emphasized the tough remarks made by the 
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman on May 20, calling the military 
action a "gross violation of the fundamental principles of 
international law" that was an "extremely dangerous 
precedent," condemning the hostilities, and "strongly" 
demanding an "immediate" end.  Unusually, the language 
referred to US and UK "power holders" (nha cam quyen) rather 
than "authorities" (chinh quyen) or "governments" (chinh 
phu), a throw-back to Cold War-era language that connotes an 
illegitimate regime.  (An MFA official assured Pol/C on 
March 21, however, that no disrespect or negative 
connotation was intended, merely an effort to point to a few 
decision-makers, rather than the entire Administration.) 
Foreign Minister Nguyen Dy Nien, the only other senior 
official quoted in the press, similarly referred to military 
action as a "bad precedent" that will "harm peace, security, 
and all aspects of political and economic life the world 
over."  A Voice of Vietnam commentary on March 20 predicted 
that "cruelty and destruction" in this war could kill as 
many as four million people, and claimed that the US purpose 
was first to seize control of Iraq's oil fields and 
eventually become "master of the world." 
 
¶3.  (U)  The MFA spokeswoman nonetheless pledged on March 20 
that Vietnam had taken "all necessary measures to ensure the 
security of our people, foreign diplomatic facilities and 
foreigners in Vietnam" and promised that Vietnam would 
remain a "truly safe destination."  She also confirmed that 
no Vietnamese remained in Iraq, with about 20 officials, 
families, students, and workers having already departed. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Security coverage at the Chancery and Rose Garden 
annex remained good.  Police responded quickly to another 
student protest (apparently, a mix of high school and 
university age) at the Chancery in mid-afternoon on March 
¶20.  This one was louder than previous ones.  At one point, 
a brick was thrown and hit the front of the Embassy, but 
there were no other negative aspects.   An expected 
demonstration at the Australian Embassy apparently did not 
take place. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Similar to cancellations of meetings with GVN and 
CPV officials on March 20 (ref a), a senior official of the 
Office of Government unexpectedly canceled a March 21 
meeting with Econ/C, claiming a sudden meeting on Iraq 
chaired by the Prime Minister.  His office later declined to 
reschedule during the week of March 24.  However, the MFA 
Americas Department deputy director met with Pol/C on March 
21 at our request to deliver a demarche on Iraq (ref a and 
septel). 
 
¶6.  (U)  CONS issued Department-approved warden message on 
March 20.  No Amcits have called to express concern for 
their safety or offer opinions on the war, although numerous 
Vietnamese have asked whether the Consular Section would 
continue to issue visas.  (Yes.)  There has been a marked 
increase in Amcit registrations, but it is not possible to 
determine whether this was due to the worldwide caution or 
to a different series of warden messages on the SARS 
outbreak. 
BURGHARDT