This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
CAIRO FOR POL - MAXSTADT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2013 
TAGS: MASS PREL NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: OBASANJO ON SECURITY ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 804 
     ¶B. 02 ABUJA 3165 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR HOWARD F. JETER FOR REASONS 1.5 
(B) AND (D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: During a June meeting, President Obasanjo 
and Ambassador Jeter discussed the status of U.S. bilateral 
security assistance programs.  Obasanjo was perplexed by 
the impending shut-down of the MPRI program, the C-130 
restoration program, and the Nigerian Armed Forces 
Resettlement Center (NAFRC) program, sponsored by the U.S. 
Department of Labor.  The President immediately ordered the 
payment of 1 million USD of the 3.5 million USD due the 
MPRI program and said the GON would pay the balance in the 
future.  He instructed newly appointed Chief of Defense 
Staff GEN Alexander Ogomudia to find a shipping company to 
transport FMF-purchased C-130 parts by Friday, June 13. 
Obasanjo was unsure of the status of the NAFRC project and 
asked Ogomudia to look into it.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
---- 
MPRI 
---- 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador Jeter reminded Obasanjo of the GON's 
promise last November to provide 3.5 million USD for MPRI's 
operations (REF B).  The Ambassador further reminded the 
President that the program would expire on July 31 if the 
funds were not forthcoming.  Obasanjo said he did not 
understand why the Finance Minister, who attended the 
November meeting, had not released the funds.  Obasanjo 
asked the Ambassador if the GON could provide 1 million USD 
in funding immediately, making up the balance of 2.5 
million USD in the future.  Ambassador said an immediate 
release of 1 million USD would show good faith on the part 
of the GON.  Obasanjo then directed NSA Mohammed to find 
the funds immediately. 
 
 
------------------------- 
C-130 RESTORATION PROGRAM 
------------------------- 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador informed Obasanjo that the GON's failure 
to contract a shipping company to transport FMF-purchased 
C-130 spare parts from the U.S. to Nigeria could cause the 
program to be cancelled.  While the MOD had identified a 
company, the GON had not yet paid the 500,000 USD up-front 
charges the company required.  Obasanjo seemed surprised 
and wondered aloud why the GON could not use another 
company.  Obasanjo then directed CDS Ogomudia to resolve 
the issue by Friday, June 13. 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Nigerian Armed Forces Resettlement Center 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Ambassador told Obasanjo that the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers and the Department of Labor were engaged in 
programs to improve the facilities and curriculum at NAFRC. 
Unfortunately, however, NAFRC is not receiving enough money 
from the GON to run its DOL donated generators, let alone 
operate properly.  Ambassador informed Obasanjo of DOL's 
intention to shut down its program if NAFRC does not 
receive operating funds.  Obasanjo asked Ogomudia to look 
into the matter.  (NOTE: The DOL-supported NAFRC program 
grew out of a direct request by Obasanjo.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
¶5.  (C) COMMENT: While Obasanjo's offer to provide 1 
million USD falls short of the 3.5 million the GON owes, it 
is a step in the right direction.  These funds should allow 
the MPRI program to operate until December, hopefully, 
giving the GON enough time to pay the 2.5 million 
shortfall.  We have informed the Ministry of Defense of the 
need to provide us with a Letter of Request (LOR) to 
continue MPRI no later than Monday, July 16.  MOD Joint 
Service Director B.O. Williams informed ODC the morning of 
July 16 that she would be attending a MOD budget planning 
meeting on July 18.  She expected to have more information 
on the MPRI funding and, possibly, the LOR that day.  END 
COMMENT. 
JETER