This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 002546 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
USDA FOR FAS/LYNN REICH AND DICK HUGHES 
STATE FOR IO/EDA SETH WINNICK, OES/ENV JULIE GOURLEY AND 
IO/S GEORGE ABRAHAMS 
USAID FOR RALPH CUMMINGS 
ATHENS FOR CLEVERLY 
 
FROM FODAG 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: AORC EAGR KUNR FAO
SUBJECT:  124TH FAO COUNCIL PREVIEW 
Ref:  a) Rome 01685, b) Rome 01558 
 
¶1. Summary:  The 124th Session of the UN Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) Council will meet June 23- 
28, 2003 in Rome.  Items of particular importance to the 
U.S. during this Council session will be:  an agenda item 
on Director General term limits; a U.S.-requested agenda 
item on reporting on World Food Summit follow-up; the 
Program of Work and Budget 2004-2005 (including the 
proposal for a split currency assessment) and a proposal 
for a second Global Forum of Food Safety Regulators.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  The 124th session of the FAO Council will meet June 
23-28, 2003 in Rome.  The 49-member Council is charged 
with, inter alia, reviewing the world food and 
agricultural situation and related matters; making 
recommendations on the current and future activities of 
the organization, including its program of work and 
budget; exercising control over the financial management 
of the organization and making recommendations to the 
conference on amendments to the basic texts.  Independent 
Chair of Council, Ambassador Aziz Mekouar (Morocco) is 
expected to return to Rome to chair the Session, 
Important issues for the upcoming session are highlighted 
below: 
 
¶3.  Agenda item 1, Adoption of the Agenda. 
------------------------------------------ 
The Council will have before it the U.S. request to add 
an agenda item on reporting on World Food Summit follow- 
up.  The EU supported the request by separate 
communication to the FAO Director General. We understand 
from the Secretariat that a short background paper will 
be prepared.  If the Council agrees to add the item to 
the agenda, U.S. delegation will need to be prepared to 
take the lead on discussion and next steps. 
 
¶4.  Agenda Item 3, Summary Program of Work and Budget 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
The Council will have before it the Summary Program of 
Work and Budget (SPWB), recently reviewed in the Finance 
and Program Committees.  No decision on the final budget 
level will be taken at the Council; U.S. delegation 
should reiterate points made on the budget during the 
Finance Committee (support for Zero Nominal Growth) and 
in the technical committees (support for standard 
setting, in particular, the Interim Commission on 
Phytosanitary Measures). 
 
¶5.  Agenda Item 9, Report of the Committee on Agriculture 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
The Council will have before it the reports of all of the 
technical committees.  U.S. intervention should 
reiterate, in particular, points on the Food Chain 
Approach to Food Safety, on Biosafety and on 
Biotechnology made during COAG (reftel a). 
 
¶6.  Agenda Item 13, the Number and Length of Term of the 
Office of the Director General 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Misoff queried the Secretariat concerning documentation 
for this agenda item, which is still not available. 
According to the FAO Legal Counsel, FAO is waiting for a 
Report from the Independent Chair of Council on the 
conclusion of the Friends of the Chair meetings on this 
subject.  The first Chair's report contained explicit 
language on the incumbent's rights to run again.  The 
U.S., EU and Canada informed the Chair by writing that 
this was not consistent with the agreement reached at the 
Friends of the Chair (reftel b).  In the absence of a 
Report from the Chair, the FAO Legal Office does not feel 
that it can proceed to draft proposed changes to the FAO 
Basic Texts. Comment: This item is particularly important 
as any change to the Basic Texts must be approved by 
Council and be notified to members 120 days before the 
Conference.  End comment. 
 
¶7.  Agenda Item 13, Report of the Finance Committee 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
The Council must approve the proposed scale of 
assessments and the proposed change to the Finance 
Regulations allowing for national project execution. 
 
Other items from the Finance Committee will be for 
Council comment and information.  USDel should speak on 
the question of a split currency assessment, which will 
be taken up again at the September Finance Committee 
session. 
 
¶8.  Agenda Item 17, Convening of the Second Global Forum 
of Food Safety Regulators 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
In addition to Council consideration, FAO and WHO will 
hold a Preparatory Meeting at FAO Headquarters on July 8, 
2003 of representatives of the G-8, the EC and other 
donor countries as well as selected countries from each 
FAO and WHO region to discuss the proposed second Global 
Forum for Food Safety Regulators. 
 
¶9.  Agenda Item 18, Application for New Membership 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
Tuvalu has applied for membership with FAO. 
 
¶10.  Japanese request on composition of Finance and 
Program Committees 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Japan has circulated two proposals to amend FAO's Basic 
Texts concerning membership of the Program and Finance 
Committees.  (Proposals faxed to IO/EDA Sharon Kotok 
6/9/03).  Both of the proposals are designed to increase 
Asian representation on the Committees. Neither proposal, 
as drafted, would affect North American membership on the 
Finance and Program Committees, but would affect other 
regions.  Japan's intention is to improve their chances 
(and that of the other Asian OECD member, Republic of 
Korea) of a seat on the two Committees. 
 
Comment 
-------- 
¶11. We expect that other regions will object to the 
Japanese proposals as they reduces their presence on the 
Committees. Any debate on the question is sure to arrive 
at the question of why the North American region (with 
only two countries and guaranteed seats on FAO's policy 
making bodies) is so favored.  Clearly, this debate is 
not in the U.S. (or Canada's interest).  End Comment. 
Hall 
NNNN 
 2003ROME02546 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED