This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 000888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/S, DRL 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR JFRAZER 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ELAB PGOV ZI
SUBJECT:  ZCTU REMAINS NONCOMMITTAL ON FUTURE MASS ACTION 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET POSTING. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Discussions with the Zimbabwe Congress of 
Trade Unions' (ZCTU's) chief economist indicate that while 
the organization is willing to publicly flex its muscles, it 
continues to be noncommittal about supporting politically- 
driven calls for mass action.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The ZCTU continues to see its path as separate 
from and complementary to, rather than congruous with, that 
of the opposition party Movement for Democratic Change 
(MDC).  Although the ZCTU made strong statements at its May 
Day celebrations that it would address political issues when 
they affect its membership, the ZCTU's primary thrust 
continues to address economic and workplace issues. 
Nevertheless, labor contacts hint that there would be tacit 
support -- if not outright mobilization -- in response to an 
expected MDC call for mass action in the next few weeks. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Comment:  Labor sources continue to express an 
awareness of their own role as distinct from the role of 
opposition leaders.  Although they are proud to be the 
source of the opposition party, they do not feel obligated 
to march in lock-step.  We strongly suspect -- due to the 
large crossover in membership -- that many individual ZCTU 
members will heed an MDC call for mass action.  However, the 
ZCTU as an organization remains bound by the concepts of 
consultation and consensus, which (notwithstanding the most 
recent mass action) often prevent swift mobilization.  End 
comment. 
 
Sullivan