This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
USAID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA FOR HAJJAR, KHANDAGLE AND MARX, 
DCHA/FFP FOR LANDIS, BRAUSE, SKORIC AND PETERSEN, 
AFR/SA FOR POE AND COPSON, AFR/SD FOR ISALROW AND WHELAN 
PRETORIA FOR FFP DISKIN AND OFDA BRYAN 
NAIROBI FOR DCHA/OFDA/ARO FOR RILEY, MYER AND SMITH, 
REDSO/ESA/FFP FOR SENYKORR 
ROME PLEASE PASS TO FODAG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KHIV ZI
SUBJECT: BINGA - INCREASED PREVALENCE OF MALNUTRITION AMONG 
CHILDREN 
 
REF: A. 02 HARARE 2337 
     ¶B. 02 HARARE 2871 
     ¶C. 02 HARARE 2472 
 
¶1. Summary: On February 11, Save the Children-UK (SCF) issued 
its third Binga District Nutrition Survey in which they 
reported a slight increase in the prevalence of acute 
malnutrition among children aged 
6 -59 months.  The increase was not enough for malnutrition 
among pre-school aged children in the district to reach 
emergency levels. Mortality rates for both children under the 
age of five and the total population were within acceptable 
levels, contradicting numerous reports of death by starvation 
throughout the district over the last several months. The 
survey does show how HIV/AIDS has negatively affected the 
community over the last year and increased food insecurity 
among the vulnerable population.  End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
Worsening Nutrition 
------------------- 
¶2. On February 11, Save the Children-UK (SCF) issued its 
third Binga District Nutrition Survey (the first was 
conducted in December 2001 and the second in April 2002) in 
which they reported a slight increase in the prevalence of 
acute malnutrition among children aged 6 - 59 months.  The 
objective of the survey was to estimate the prevalence of 
acute malnutrition and assess the changes in malnutrition 
levels.  The survey covered all 21 wards in Binga and 
presented weight and height measurement data on 933 randomly 
selected children. 
 
¶3.  Binga is one of the most isolated and least developed 
districts in Zimbabwe and was the site of heated discussions 
between the Government and SCF about food aid politicization 
last October.  Food deliveries in Binga were blocked on two 
separate occasions, leaving the district without general food 
distribution for two months, although the Catholic church 
school feeding program continued. On October, 4 local 
authorities ordered Save the Children U.K. to halt food 
distribution, five months after previously having forced the 
Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace (CCJP) to stop 
distribution efforts in the same town. (The Catholic church 
feeding program was later resumed by a different church 
entity in advance of SCF's problems. See Reftels) 
 
¶4.  As reported in ReftelB, SCF was just resuming food 
distributions in December, after a Government of Zimbabwe 
imposed, two and a half month suspension, and was preparing 
to feed the entire population of Binga (120,000 people 
according to the 2002 census results). Catholic Development 
Commission (CADEC) was providing supplementary feeding to 
63,000 children aged 6 months to 12 years and 2000 pregnant 
women. 
 
¶5.  Global acute malnutrition among pre-school aged children, 
measured by a decrease in the weight for height index and the 
presence of edema, worsened from April 2002 from 3.5 percent 
to 4.2 percent but was still within the acceptable range for 
malnutrition.  Chronic malnutrition or stunting increased to 
33.2 percent from 29.5 percent indicating that one-third of 
children are subjected to prolonged food deficits resulting 
in compromised physical development. Children not receiving 
SCF general food rations were 3.4 times more likely to be 
acutely malnourished. 
 
------------------------------- 
HIV/AIDS Likely Cause of Deaths 
-------------------------------- 
¶6.  The crude mortality rate and the mortality rate for 
children under five were considered normal, debunking 
speculation that Binga had suffered widespread deaths by 
starvation.  After an examination of the demographic 
characteristics of the sampled households, one can infer that 
the primary causes of death during the three months preceding 
the survey were malaria and HIV/AIDS-related illnesses. 
(Note: The survey period coincided with the beginning of 
malaria season. End Note.) 
 
¶7.  The demographic composition of the survey sample was 
consistent with a community suffering from high levels of 
HIV/AIDS infection.  Orphans were 8.2 percent of the surveyed 
children, up from 4.8 percent in April.  Of this 8.2 percent, 
2.3 percent had lost a mother only and 5.6 percent a father. 
There was a decrease in the percentage of female-headed 
households from 22.9 to 14.4 percent, which could be 
attributed to a decline in male migrational labor.  There was 
one child-headed household, whereas the previous survey 
reported none.  Households headed by an elderly person 
comprised 28 percent of respondents and households with 
either a chronically ill decision maker or other adult male 
comprised two percent of respondents. 
 
¶8.  Comment: This nutrition survey is a good assessment of 
the effect of SCF program on children aged 6 - 59 months. 
The sample selection appears to have been random and 
relatively free of bias and thus is a good representation of 
pre-school aged children.  The results show that although 
malnutrition levels have increased, those receiving SCF food 
aid are doing much better than those who do not, even though 
94 percent of children under five are also receiving CADEC 
supplementary food.  The survey is also good in that it 
provides a snapshot of how disease is affecting this 
chronically food insecure community.  SCF will conduct 
another survey to assess ongoing needs during the upcoming 
April/May harvest. 
 
¶9.  Comment continued: Unfortunately, one cannot extrapolate 
the results of this survey to the larger population receiving 
SCF food because the sample size does not reflect the 
population being fed by SCF. A growing body of literature is 
recognizing that using pre-school aged children as proxy 
indicators for the nutritional status for the entire 
population does not provide an accurate picture of 
malnutrition in a community.  School-age children and adults 
could well exhibit higher levels of malnutrition because they 
are not receiving CADEC supplementary food in addition to the 
SCF rations.  Also, adults, particularly mothers, may be 
forfeiting some of their food to ensure that their children 
are getting enough to eat.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
SULLIVAN