This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001431 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, SA/RA AND S/CT 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PINS CASC NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  MAOISTS ANNOUNCE THEIR RETURN TO TALKS, 
BUT THREATS TO AMERICAN INTERESTS INCREASE 
 
REF: A. KATHMANDU 1418 
     ¶B. KATHMANDU 1423 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b) and 
 (d). 
 
Summary 
======== 
 
¶1.  (C) In the afternoon of July 31, the Maoists announced 
that they would sit for a third round of peace talks on the 
condition that the third round would address political, 
rather than technical matters.  The Nepalese police have 
received reports from villagers that British and American 
trekkers in two northern districts could be kidnapped or 
killed.  Save the Children U.S., was ordered to shut down its 
development projects in three districts immediately north of 
Kathmandu under threat of "severe action."  End summary. 
 
Maoists to Sit for Third Round of Talks 
========================================= 
 
¶2.  (SBU) At 1630 on July 31, the Embassy received from 
Government of Nepal sources a copy of a public statement 
accredited to Maoist supremo Prachanda, stating that the 
Maoists have decided to sit for the third round of peace 
talks.  The statement continued by demanding that the next 
round should focus on political matters, rather than 
technical or procedural issues.  Although unsigned, the 
statement matches previous public announcements in form and 
content.  The head of the government-run media quoted the 
government's lead negotiator, Minister Kamal Thapa, as saying 
the talks would be held.  The Embassy has learned also that 
due to claimed security concerns, the Maoists will likely 
return Maoist ideologue and chief negotiator Baburam 
Bhattarai and an additional, unnamed negotiator to Kathmandu 
from their current sanctuaries in India. 
 
Threats to American and British Trekkers 
========================================= 
 
¶3.  (C) The ARSO received a report today from the Nepalese 
police that trekkers in Manang and Mustang (north-central 
Nepal) are being stopped and shaken down for money.  Once the 
Maoists established that the trekkers were not from the U.S. 
or Britain, they were allowed to pass.  Local villagers 
quoted the Maoists with saying that it was a good thing that 
the trekkers were not from America or Britain because 
otherwise they would be kidnapped or killed. 
 
Threats to Save the Children U.S. 
================================== 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On July 29, the Maoists posted notices in the 
districts of Nuwakot, Rasuwa, and Sindhupalchok (the three 
districts immediately north of Kathmandu).  The Embassy spoke 
with the Country Director of Save the Children U.S., who 
reported that they are evaluating the safety of their four 
Nepali staff members in Nuwakot and may consider withdrawing 
them.  The Director reported that his staff in the field has 
not yet been approached directly by the Maoists. 
 
Begin text of the Maoist notice: 
 
Notice of Nepal Communist Party (Maoist) of Nuwakot, Rasuwa 
and Sindhupalchok 
 
¶1.  The justice loving public is heartily requested to help 
fully close the NGO and INGO run by the American 
imperialists, and not to support or work in such 
organizations. 
 
¶2.  It is found that Save the Children run by the American 
Imperialists is carrying out its activities under the cover 
of the Red Cross.  A pious institution like Red Cross is 
requested not to run the programs of Save the Children under 
its cover. 
 
¶3.  All the temporary teachers should be made permanent 
without condition, and request the school management and the 
principal not to appoint or let the so-called permanent 
teachers attend school, except those who are presently 
working. 
 
¶4.  All justice loving members of the public are heartily 
requested to implement the above notice. 
 
The Nepal Communist Party (Maoist) will be compelled to take 
severe action if any activities are carried out ignoring this 
notice. 
 
With revolutionary greetings 
Thanks! 
 
End text. 
 
Comment 
======== 
 
¶5.  (C) Peace Talks:  The Maoists' decision to return to the 
negotiating table is a welcome relief for the government 
(refs A & B).  However, the government's concessions to save 
peace talks have rewarded the Maoists' brinkmanship, 
increasing the likelihood that the Maoists will try this 
tactic again. 
 
¶6.  (C) Threats to Americans:  The threats made against Save 
the Children echo earlier reports on Maoist efforts to limit 
U.S.-funded development programs.  The head of Nepal's 
National Planning Commission, Shanker Sharma, told the 
Ambassador today that Maoists in a number of districts are 
increasing pressure on foreign supported NGOs in general, but 
are being more tolerant of Nepali NGOs.  The threats to 
American and British travelers is a new and troubling 
development.  In the past, Maoists have issued public 
statements welcoming tourists to Nepal and assuring them that 
their struggle was with the Government of Nepal only.  Post 
will follow up on this report to determine whether it is 
repeated. 
MALINOWSKI