This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 005188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER MOPS ASEC EFIN IZ JO
SUBJECT: A/S BURNS DISCUSSES IRAQ WITH PM ABUL RAGHEB AND 
FONMIN MUASHER 
 
REF: AMMAN 5041 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (S)  In separate meetings with PM Abul Ragheb and FonMin 
Muasher August 13, A/S Burns expressed condolences for the 
bombing of the Jordanian Embassy in Baghdad and pledged 
continued USG support in the investigation.  Muasher 
characterized the recent Arab League (AL) meeting in Cairo as 
"positive" on Iraq, noting that Jordan will join the CIC and 
receive members of the Iraqi Governing Council (GC), except 
Ahmed Chalabi.  PM Abul Ragheb hoped the Jordanian private 
sector could play a positive role in Iraq, but suggested that 
the GC and CPA set out the rules for foreign investment and 
economic transactions as soon as possible.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
CONDOLENCES ON BOMBING, BAGHDAD EMBASSY SECURITY 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2.  (S)  A/S Burns expressed condolences for the bombing of 
the Jordanian Embassy in separate meetings with Prime 
Minister Ali Abul Ragheb and Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher 
August 13.  Charge and PolCouns attended both meetings, and 
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Shaher Bak joined the 
PM's meeting.  A/S Burns described his recent trip to Iraq 
and differences he saw between the difficult situation in 
Baghdad and more positive developments in other parts of the 
country.  He also outlined Amb. Bremer's plan to have a 
constitution written and elections held for a fully sovereign 
Iraqi government if possible within a year.  He said the U.S. 
is encouraging the members of the GC to visit regional states 
to explain what they are doing.  He also outlined the draft 
UN Security Council Resolution that the U.S. had introduced 
in New York. 
 
¶3.  (S)  Abul Ragheb and Muasher thanked Burns for USG 
support to the Jordanian Mission following the bombing, and 
reiterated the GOJ's earlier request (ref) for "full" USG 
protection for the alternate Jordanian mission site in 
Baghdad, the former Jordanian Ambassador's Residence: "We 
can't go through another attack," Muasher said.  Both asked 
to be kept abreast of all of the developments in the 
investigation into the bombing.  PM Abul Ragheb noted that 
the bombing of the Embassy was followed almost immediately by 
looting by a large group of Iraqis.  This suggested that the 
bombing and looting were coordinated, and done by people who 
wanted to send the message that Iraqis are not happy with 
Jordan's presence in Iraq.  Charge Hale noted that an FBI 
team was transiting Jordan on its way to conduct the 
investigation. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  In a separate conversation August 13, Muasher's 
Office Director, Ali al-Ayed, told PolCouns that ORCA Baghdad 
and Jordanian security service personnel would conduct a 
joint security evaluation of the Jordanian Ambassador's 
Residence in Baghdad on August 14. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
ARAB LEAGUE MORE POSITIVE ON IRAQ THAN U.S. REALIZES 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Muasher commented that the U.S. has unfairly 
characterized the August 5 Arab League ministerial level 
follow-up committee meeting in Cairo as negative on Iraq. 
Although the meeting had not reached consensus on recognizing 
the GC as a sovereign state, it had nonetheless been one of 
the most productive Arab League meetings he has attended in 
the past two years.  The "general spirit" of the discussion 
on Iraq and the GC was good, even from Syria.  There was 
"almost a consensus" that the AL and Arab states must deal 
with the GC in a realistic manner. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Abul Ragheb and Muasher noted that Jordan would be 
happy to receive members of the GC, except for Ahmed Chalabi. 
 Muasher expressed hope that, when free elections for an 
Iraqi government are held, "Chalabi won't be a problem." 
(Note:  Muasher's presumption was that Chalabi would be 
defeated in any vote.  End note.)  Abul Ragheb welcomed the 
U.S. approach to the UNSC on Iraq, noting that greater UN 
involvement in Iraq would be positive. 
 
------------------------ 
JORDAN WILL JOIN THE CIC 
------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (C)  Muasher said that Jordan has decided to appoint a 
representative to the CIC.  At the moment, the GOJ is trying 
to identify an appropriate official with the proper economic 
background.  In the meantime, Jordan's Charge in Baghdad, 
Dimae Haddad, will attend CIC meetings.  Abul Ragheb said 
that he hoped Jordan's private sector could help in Iraq in 
two ways.  First, Jordanian companies could complete small, 
short-term reconstruction projects.  Second, many Jordanian 
firms would seek a larger long-term role.  However, the CPA 
and GC must first clarify the legal ground rules for foreign 
investment, customs, taxes and tax incentives, and land and 
real property ownership. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
LET IRAQIS BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR OWN SECURITY 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶8.  (C)  A/S Burns noted that there are more than 34,000 
Iraqi police officers back at work.  Abul Ragheb applauded 
this fact, saying that it is vitally important that Iraqis be 
responsible for their own security.  He also opined that the 
CPA is too concerned with de-Baathification, and that it is 
more important to "get the system up and running" than to 
eliminate all former officials. 
 
¶9.  (U)  A/S Burns has cleared this message. 
 
¶10.  (U)  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
HALE