This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO IZ HO PA
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON MIGRATION, JUNE 24, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial on Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" 
on 6/24 entitled "Migration". "Negotiations on the migration 
issue were conducted between the governor of New Mexico and 
the Mexican President, Vicente Fox. President Fox believed 
that, with Mexico being one of the U.S.'s closest neighbors, 
the openness of the U.S. on the migration issue would be 
without precedents. Migration was not at the top of 
President Bush's To-Do list but it is one of the top 
priorities for Mexico. Tensions and amicable feelings have 
been on and off and recently it seems Mexico has been 
distancing itself from the U.S., so much that Fox hasn't 
contributed very much with the Bush Administration nor did 
he support the U.S. campaign in Iraq." 
 
"Resentment has grown between the two nations, yet it has 
helped Fox since he rose and gained support from his 
citizens by using the traditional bitterness already felt 
for the U.S. Yet this antipathy can't continue if Mexico 
wishes to continue with a Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. 
close at hand. That is why the governor of New Mexico 
visited Fox, to try to amend the tension between the two 
countries. Honduras is included in the migratory topic 
because if the U.S. is willing to reopen its doors for 
Mexico then Honduras should take advantage of the 
opportunity as well." 
 
Palmer