This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID  DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: KUWAIT SITREP NO. 54 
 
REF: KUWAIT 1420 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 54 AS OF 1800 HOURS LOCAL, 1100 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME APRIL 15, 2003. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP (all reported times are 
Kuwait Local, GMT plus three): 
 
----------------- 
Security/Military 
----------------- 
 
1030 Call received from a Kuwaiti man whose brother is 
employed as a contract linguist with the US military. 
The family is worried about him since they have not heard 
from him, and would like to know that he is well.  Per 
advice of Embassy military office, family was instructed 
to contact the Kuwait Ministry of Defense. 
 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
 
NSTR 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
 
0800 Contacted by Task Force for update on status on a 
critically burned 12 year old boy, in Saddam City 
Hospital.  Embassy had no information on the case, and 
this fact was reported to Task Force. 
 
1745 Contacted by a reporter with an ABC Affiliate in 
Houston, TX.  He claims his colleague is stuck trying to 
get back into Kuwait from Iraq with an Iraqi child. 
Matter referred to Consular section.  Consular section 
contacted Save the Children which advised that the 
stranded reporter should deliver the child to the British 
Civil Affairs authority in Umm Qasr, where the child 
could be properly cared for until a humanitarian 
assistance agency could assume his care and assist in 
identifying him and possibly returning him to Baghdad. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
NSTR 
 
-------------- 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
 
NSTR 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: N/A. 
 
JONES