This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 003703 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU JO IS KPAL KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 4-10: GUANTANAMO 
DETAINEES, IRAQI GOVERNING COUNCIL, ABU MAZEN VISIT TO 
KUWAIT, IRAQI-KUWAITI RELATIONS, CURRICULUM REFORM 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: Kuwaiti officials reportedly postponed a 
scheduled trip by Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas 
to Kuwait this week over Palestinian "hesitation" to condemn 
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. One commentator 
writes, "It is not acceptable to consider the occupation of 
Kuwait legitimate, while Israel's occupation of Palestine is 
illegitimate." 
 
One liberal writer chastises Islamist MP Waleed Al-Tabtabaie 
for his statement published earlier in the week that US 
treatment of Guantanamo detainees is the same as that of 
Kuwaiti POWs at the hands of Saddam's regime. There is 
hopeful support for the Iraqi Governing Council, and 
derision for the Arab League and its refusal to recognize 
the Council or send troops as part of a stabilization force. 
 
In a newspaper interview, an Assistant Undersecretary at the 
Ministry of Education denies foreign pressure for 
educational curriculum reform. One commentator feels Iraq 
and Kuwait share mutual economic interests beyond their 
"brotherly relations." END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: On August 10, Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that 
Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas may begin a trip to 
Kuwait "soon" after resolving the issue of condemning the 
Iraqi invasion to Kuwait. Earlier in the week, all papers 
reported comments by Prime Minister Sheikh Sabab Al-Ahmad 
that a proposed visit by Abbas was postponed over 
Palestinian hesitation to apologize for their support of the 
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. 
 
All papers report "anti-Kuwait riots" in southern Iraq in 
which Kuwaiti vehicles were attacked amid allegations of 
Kuwaiti smuggling of Iraqi oil. 
 
Al-Qabas published an interview on August 10 with Assistant 
Undersecretary of the Ministry of Education Ms. Noriyah Al- 
Subeih in which she strongly denies that there is "foreign 
pressure" to change the Kuwaiti curriculum, and that "some 
Muslims have a wrong interpretation of Jihad" which leads to 
extremism. 
 
Al-Qabas reports that according to an Iraqi newspaper, 
Kuwait has agreed to forgive 75% of Iraq Airways debt, 
estimated at US$600 million, and to present two commercial 
planes to the airlines once approval is received from the 
Iraqi Interim Governing Council. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3. "The Most Courageous Decision for Sabah Al-Ahmad" 
Abdelamir Al-Turki wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/10): 
"When Kuwait asks the Palestinian Authority to apologize for 
its support of the Iraqi invasion in 1990, it is in fact 
supporting the Palestinian Authority and its people who are 
suffering under the Israeli occupation. This is how the 
Kuwaiti position must be understood. We demand an apology 
from the Palestinian Authority. [I]t is not acceptable to 
consider the occupation of Kuwait legitimate, while Israel's 
occupation of Palestine is illegitimate. This is the core of 
rejecting the visit of Abu Mazen to Kuwait." 
 
¶4.  "The POWs Belong to Al-Qaeda- They Are Not Ours" 
Liberal Abdellatif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(8/6):  "Whether we like it or not, it remains the 
responsibility of the Kuwaiti government to work for the 
release of the Kuwaiti detainees at Guantanamo. However, 
many people still insist that they are our POWs while in 
fact, they are the POWs of the Al-Qaeda organization. They 
cannot be considered on the same level with our POWs in 
Iraq." 
 
¶5.  "MP Waleed, You Should Not Say That" 
Talal Al-Arab wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/10):  "MP 
Waleed Al-Tabtabaei accused America, the closest ally to 
Kuwait, of treating the detainees in Guantanamo as Saddam 
treated our POWs in Iraq. As far as I have heard, our 
detainees in Guantanamo have the right to practice their 
religion, get medical treatment and will receive some money 
upon their release. As for Saddam, the fate of the prisoners 
was execution in cold blood. We sympathize with the 
detainees in Guantanamo and we wish that the US would offer 
them fair trail, or just release them, but at the same time, 
we do not blame America for detaining them. What brought 
those people to Afghanistan? Were they doing charity work.?" 
 
¶6.  "The Difference is in the Method" 
Bader Bin Issa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/10): 
"America's determination to continue the detention of 650 
human beings in Guantanamo, treating them in an inhumane way 
for over one and a half years. without any legitimate 
accusation, is similar to what Saddam Hussein did with 
Kuwaiti POWs. Saddam executed Kuwaiti POWs without putting 
them on trial, and as for the US, it will execute them after 
they are put on trial. The result is the same, but method is 
different." 
 
¶7.  Abdelmohsen Jamal wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/7): 
"The formation of the Iraqi Transitional Ruling Council will 
prepare the Iraqis to deal with their new reality and 
eventually accept the outcome of any democratic elections. 
Although it seems to be difficult for some Arab political 
regimes to understand this scenario. the Transitional Ruling 
Council is the best way to deal with the complicated reality 
that currently prevails in Iraq." 
 
¶8.  Saleh Al-Shayji wrote in independent Al-Anba (8/10): 
"Arabs who objected to the liberation of Kuwait in 1991 are 
the same people who are objecting to sending Arab peace 
forces to maintain peace in Iraq. The Arab League, 
influenced by a group of assassins and supporters of Saddam, 
refused to recognize the Transitional Ruling Council in Iraq 
or to send Arab peacekeeping forces to Iraq. Iraqis should 
confront the Arab League because it does not deserve any 
respect." 
 
¶9.  Saud Al-Samaka wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/9): 
"Iraq and the Iraqi people are lucky that the Arab League 
refused to send Arab troops to Iraq. This will ensure that 
Iraq is not infected by Arab security methods which are 
based on stripping the dignity from humans." 
 
¶10.  "What Does Washington Want From Riyadh?" 
Waleed Al-Ahamd wrote in independent Al-Anba' (8/4): 
"President Bush realizes that there is no proof behind these 
accusations [of Saudi government support of the 9/11 
terrorists] but he cannot express his opinion freely without 
deferring to the American policymakers who guarantee the 
security of Israel." 
 
¶11.  "Not Just Brotherly Relations" 
Former Secretary General of the Kuwait Democratic Forum 
Ahmad Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (8/5): 
"Iraq has and still needs Kuwait as a naval port and as a 
commercial and financial center. Likewise, Kuwait needs Iraq 
because oil will not remain a source of income indefinitely, 
requiring Kuwait to assume a role as a commercial and 
financial center in the region. There are common strategic 
needs that will influence future relations between the two 
countries." 
 
 
JONES