This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 001789 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR ECOSOC DELEGATION 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BM NL EUN
SUBJECT: DUTCH ON BURMA: EU WAITING UNTIL AUTUMN 
 
REF: SECSTATE 200487 
 
Classified By: A/PolCouns Nathaniel Dean Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C) PolOff made reftel points to Roeland Kollen, Policy 
Officer in the MFA's South-East Asia Division, on July 11. 
Kollen said the EU will consider additional bilateral 
measures against Burma this fall; at present, the EU is 
deliberating on what other measures, if any, might be useful 
in promoting democratic change.  Kollen said that the idea of 
an import ban has been brought up in informal conversations, 
but is not currently under serious consideration.  He was 
unsure whether or not this idea would face great obstacles 
within the EU.  The GoNL discourages Dutch companies from 
investing in Burma, but does not traditionally support 
import/export or investment bans.  Kollen could not say 
whether or not the GoNL would approve such a ban in this 
situation.  Note:  At present, there is very little Dutch 
investment in Burma.  End note. 
 
¶2.  (C) Dutch Foreign Minister Jaap de Hoop Scheffer plans to 
travel to Bali, Indonesia July 23-24 for the Asia-Europe 
(ASEM) Foreign Minister's meeting.  The Dutch hope to have a 
bilateral with the Chinese on the margins, and Kollen stated 
that Burma will be on the list of topics.  Kollen also said 
that the EU is reviewing options regarding Burma and the 
CHR/ECOSOC resolution. 
 
¶3. (C) The Dutch are discussing UN Special Envoy Razali's 
current mission and mandate, and will closely watch his 
presentation to the ICG on July 15.  Kollen opined whether a 
permanent mission in Burma, staffed by the right individual, 
might be a alternate plausible option.  He also added that 
the Dutch "do not blame Razali" for the worsening situation 
in country. 
SOBEL