This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091005Z Jun 03UNCLAS ANKARA 003707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR E, EB/IFD AND EUR/SE 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - MILLS AND LEICHTER 
NSC FOR QUANRUD AND BRYZA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON TU
SUBJECT: EMBASSY DELIVERS DRAFT FINANCIAL AGREEMENT TO 
TREASURY 
 
 
REF: STATE 154013 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request -- see para 4. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) EconCouns delivered the draft financial agreement 
and disbursement request document to Treasury Deputy U/S 
Aydin Karaoz June 9, highlighting the agreement's economic 
and political conditions.  Karaoz said he or Deputy Director 
General Melih Nemli would probably lead the Turkish team to 
Washington for discussions, and promised to get back to us 
shortly with proposed dates. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Karaoz said Treasury had not planned to hire a U.S. 
private counsel, but could do so if the U.S. considered it 
essential.  EconCouns responded that, per reftel, Turkey 
would need to provide an opinion of counsel from a U.S. 
private firm, as well as from government counsel. At Karaoz's 
request, he offered to query Washington on whether (a) the 
USG considered the presence of a U.S. private counsel in the 
discussions essential (beyond providing the opinion noted 
above), and (b) U.S. Treasury would also be represented by 
private counsel. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Action Request:  Embassy requests clarification on 
the role/necessity of private counsel in these discussions. 
PEARSON