This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BB BF DR GY JM PINR TD NS
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN ISSUES CONFERENCE: EMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 245508 
 
 ¶1.  (U)  Embassy Santo Domingo strongly supports the 
proposal of a Caribbean issues conference and expects to 
nominate an Embassy participant. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In response to para 8 inquiry concerning possible 
Dominican participants we have the following comments: 
 
- - Frederic Emam Zade, Director of Economic Development of 
the Fundacion Global Democracia Desarrollo, would be an 
appropriate choice for the panel on "Engines of Growth." 
Note that he is close to former President Leonel Fernandez, 
who has future presidential ambitions.  Business phone: (809) 
472-0202 ext 224. 
 
- - Frank Rainieri, Chairman of the Punta Cana Group, could 
ably discuss the touristic investments and development of 
that particular region in the Dominican Republic.  Rainieri 
is close to current President of the Dominican Republic 
Hipolito Mejia.  He would provide a private sector point of 
view.  Business phone (809) 541-2714, 541-2715, ext. 233; in 
Punta Cana 221-2262, business fax (809) 686-0165. 
 
- - A possible alternative voice on tourism might be Ellis 
Perez, Director General of Aerodom, the national airports 
authority.  Perez has extensive experience in the sector, 
served as Subsecretary of Tourism and has had a long career 
in communications.  He has lectured in tourism at the 
university level and could provide a wider view of tourism in 
the Dominican economy.  (Reftel does not indicate whether the 
conference will be entirely in English or whether Spanish 
interpretation is provided; we do not have a record of Perez' 
English language ability.)  Business phone (809) 472-2030, 
business fax (809) 565-0561. 
 
- - A possible panelist on the final session on "Migration" 
might be Juan Artola, chief of mission in Santo Domingo for 
the International Migration Organization.  Artola, from 
Uruguay, has had a leading role in pressing the GODR to pass 
legislation and create mechanisms to deal with immigration 
and to deal with trafficking in persons.  He is fluent in 
English and a good contact of the Embassy.  Business phone 
(809) 732-7121, (809) 566-0430; business fax is (809) 
683-4636, e-mail is iomsdomingo@codetel.net.do 
 
¶3.  (U)  Embassy has not yet contacted Emam Zade or Rainieri 
but will seek to ascertain their availability. 
KUBISKE