This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003878 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CAIRO ALSO FOR FAS - CHAUDRY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN OFFERS FOOD SAFETY HELP ON IRAQ IMPORTS 
 
THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST. 
 
¶1.  (u)  In mid-June, Jordanian and Iraqi businesspeople 
purchased on the high seas a shipment of 4,652 tons of 
Brazilian frozen chicken for import to Iraq through 
Jordan.  The same shipment had previously been rejected by 
Saudi Arabia, Oman, Yemen for health and safety reasons 
due to a problem with the freezing system in the vessel. 
When the ship arrived in the port of Aqaba, the Jordanian 
Health and Agriculture Ministers rejected the shipment as 
unfit for human consumption under GOJ standards. 
 
¶2.  (u)  Aqaba Special Economic Zone Chief Commissioner 
Beltaji approached the Ambassador to say that Jordan had 
been uncomfortable in taking this action since food 
health and safety inspections are normally the 
responsibility of the health authorities of the final 
importing country.  However, the GOJ -- knowing that such 
inspections are not taking place in Iraq -- decided that 
it had a moral responsibility to the Iraqi people not to 
allow unsafe food to pass through its territory. 
 
¶3.  (u)  Beltaji and Health Minister Walid al-Maani told 
the Ambassador that the Jordanian authorities were ready 
upon request of authorities in Iraq to conduct regular 
health and safety inspections of food transiting Jordan 
to Iraq.  This would be temporary until Iraqi officials 
were able to resume their own inspections at the border. 
 
¶4.  (u)  Action request:  Please advise. 
GNEHM