This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002714 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO MOPS PGOV IZ HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, NOVEMBER 18, 2003 
 
 
¶1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" 
on 11/18 entitled "Troops are stationed in low risk zones in 
Iraq".  "After a short visit to Iraq to supervise the work 
of the Honduran troops in that country, the Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve said that the Honduran troops have 
received all the support they require from the coalition 
forces." 
 
"Breve also said that the Honduran troops have been deployed 
in one of the most peaceful zones on the Najaf region. 
Breve added that he had the chance of joining the troops on 
some of their missions to verify that the risk they face is 
minimal." 
 
¶2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El Heraldo" 
on 11/18 entitled "Honduras will withdraw its troops if they 
face any danger".  "After returning from a short visit to 
Iraq, the Minister of Defense Federico Breve said that 
President Maduro would consider the possibility of 
withdrawing the Honduran troops from Iraq or re-station them 
in a safer place if the risks they face increase in any 
way." 
 
"Breve said, we will really need to evaluate our presence in 
Iraq. we won't take any unnecessary risks.  Thus, if we are 
aware that the risks to our troops increase, we'll assess 
our presence in Iraq. If the lives of our soldiers are in 
any danger, there's a chance to bring them back, or re- 
station them somewhere else." 
 
Palmer