This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091455Z Nov 03UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002864 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR EAID KDEM GT
SUBJECT: ALL QUIET ON EVE OF GUATEMALAN ELECTIONS 
 
 
¶1. With fourteen hours to go before the opening of voting 
tables on November 9, no election-related disturbances have 
been reported.  The prohibition on partisan campaigning went 
into effect at noon on November 7, and all the political 
parties have ceased campaigning.  The sale of alcohol has 
been suspended.  News reports from around the country note 
that everything is normal.  Businesses are open and traffic 
is the same as any weekend. 
 
¶2. Embassy election observers have reported from their remote 
locations that things are quiet around the country.  We spoke 
with senior representatives of the major political parties 
late on November 8, and none report any problems anticipated 
on election day. 
 
¶3. The Ambassador toured the Mirador Electoral quick-count 
center and the Election Central of the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE) on the morning of November 8.  The TSE 
magistrates said that everything was in good shape for the 
elections, and said they expect it to be a civic event 
("fiesta civica").  The Ambassador spoke with the Ministers 
of Defense and Government on the evening of November 7, and 
both say the security forces are prepared to preserve order 
on election day. 
 
¶4. Comment: Defying months of rumors of pre-electoral 
violence and fears that most economic activity would be shut 
down, Guatemala appears poised to have a peaceful election. 
HAMILTON