This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001954 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/01/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: 99 PROMINENT JORDANIANS LETTER EXHORT KING 
ABDULLAH TO TAKE TOUGHER STANCE AGAINST IRAQ WAR 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) On March 31, Al Arab Al Yawm newspaper published an 
open letter to King Abdullah, signed by 99 prominent 
Jordanians, urging the King to toughen his stance against the 
"U.S. aggression" in Iraq.  The letter's signers include 
former prime ministers, ministers, deputies, former 
intelligence officers, Islamists, and a communist party 
leader.  The letter requests that the King condemn the 
"illegitimate aggression" against Iraq and its people and 
subsequently, after the war has ended, "to refuse to 
recognize any political or legal outcomes of the aggression." 
 Anxiety about the letter and the gap between  public opinion 
and Iraq policy could spark more declarations from the GOJ on 
the need to end the war. End Summary 
 
------------------- 
Jordanian Who's Who 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) The letter sparked interest both for its content and 
for its "who's who" of prominent --if historical-- Jordanian 
political figures.  Among the signers are former prime 
ministers Mudar Badran, Ahmad Obeidat, Taher Masri and Abdur 
Ra'uf S. Rawabdeh, former Deputy Prime Minister Ayman Majali, 
Islamist activist Leith Shbeilat, an Islamist sentenced to 
death for conspiring against the State in 1992, and Yacoub 
Zayaddine, a veteran communist leader. 
 
---------------------------- 
Letter's Request to the King 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The letter urges King Abdullah to condemn strongly 
"the US aggression", citing astonishment at the lack of an 
official Arab position that "rises to the level of people's 
conscience."  The letter further states that only by standing 
with Iraq, in its time of need, will Arab governments be able 
to defend their own legitimacy in light of the American 
aggression.  The letter, goes further by urging the King "to 
refuse to recognize any political or legal outcomes of the 
aggression." 
 
------------------------- 
Grab bag of Old Tired Issues 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The letter justifies these requests by pulling 
together a tired set of knee-jerk -- but nonetheless, 
emotionally powerful -- pan-Arab ideals and East Bank fears: 
Arab solidarity against "aggression," the need for 
"international legitimacy" (i.e. the UN), and the fear that 
Israel harbors plans to expel Palestinians to Jordan.  It is 
also interesting that the letter calls on the King only to 
"push forward the rising international efforts that seek to 
condemn the Anglo-American aggression against the land and 
people of Iraq."  It does not suggest support for Saddam 
Hussein or the Iraqi regime, nor does it call for expulsion 
of U.S. forces from Jordan (a demand of most anti-war 
activists). 
 
---------------------------------- 
Letter Causes a Stir at the Palace 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Minister for Palace Affairs Faisal al-Fayez and 
Planning Minister Bassam Awadallah told the Ambassador 
separately that the Palace is quite upset by the letter. 
Fayez was scathing in his attack on the signatories -- saying 
they each had their own personal agenda and most wanted a 
job.  Although the letter's message will not affect the GOJ's 
support for our effort, Fayez said, the Palace has to take 
notice, since "ninety percent" of Jordanians agree with its 
content.  Fayez said those in the Palace are feeling a need 
to "protect the King," hinting that senior officials may 
consequently make stronger calls for an end to the war and 
deplore more loudly the civilian casualties. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
They just want the King to remember the past 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Peace activist and political science professor 
Mohammed Kheir Mustafa told PolCouns April 1 that the letter 
represents old-line East bankers' attempt to consolidate 
opposition to the war with pan-Arab slogans -- and to get the 
King on board.  By contrast, human rights activist Fawsi 
Samhoury (strictly protect) was uncharacteristically cynical 
about the letter and those who signed it.  He said the group 
was composed of political has-beens and supporters of the 
late King Hussein who are now "on the outside."  He noted 
wryly that many of them also have investments in Iraq which 
might be hurt by a more open political and economic system 
there. 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
¶7. (C) The letter is a shot across the King's bow by many of 
his father's closest advisors and political supporters.  Its 
directness and -- in a culture that emphasizes respect for 
authority -- its rudeness have great shock value.  Two of the 
signers told the press that they hoped to use the letter 
merely to get the King's attention.  More than likely, 
members of this group no longer command King Abdullah's 
attention as they once commanded King Hussein's. 
 
¶8. (C) That said, the letter has the potential to focus 
opposition to the war, and does point out the great 
disconnect between popular attitudes to the war and 
government policy.  This makes the King's advisors very 
nervous, and we are likely to see at least some of them 
taking a stronger anti-war stance in public to shield 
themselves and the King from public ire. 
GNEHM