This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PINS TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
JULY 16, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 16, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often Adana contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¶2. Dunya / According to the Chicago Tribune, 
PKK/KADEK terrorists in Northern Iraq are waiting 
for a signal to start attacks in Eastern Turkey. 
In case of their demands not being accepted by 
the Turkish Government PKK will give orders for 
attacks. If the US Government allows this, it 
will create problems in the future. 
 
 
¶3. Evrensel, Turkiye,  / Turkish Security Forces 
announced that they are going to start clearing 
the landmines near the Syrian Border. 
 
 
¶4. Evrensel / Talkshow entertainer Murat Batgi 
and singer Rojin are accused of giving support to 
PKK/KADEK during their shows and concerts. 
Government officials are to question them. 
 
 
¶5. Evrensel / Peace Platform in Batman organized 
a walk for peace. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECONOMICAL 
 
 
¶6. Milliyet, Hurriyet, Bolge, Gunaydin, / Adana 
Chamber of Commerce is organizing an industrial 
fair between October 6-13. Saban Bas, the head of 
the Chamber of Commerce announced that this is a 
big, important event for Adana and asked for the 
support of the NGOs and Cukurova University.  The 
Rector of Cukurova University and some members of 
the Chamber of Commerce had a meeting and agreed 
on the support of the professors from the 
Agriculture and Business and Economics 
Departments for the fair. 
 
 
¶7. Cumhuriyet, Milli Gazete / Government 
officials, NGOs and the Municipality of Mardin 
gathered for a meeting to get the approval for 
Mardin to apply for the World Heritage List. 
Great number of university professors and Marie- 
Laure Sturn, wife of the Chief DCM of the French 
Embassy attended the meeting and gave their 
support. 
 
 
¶8. Gunaydin / A group of Syrian Businessmen 
visited Mersin for business arrangements. Prime 
Minister Erdogan accepted the group's courtesy 
call during the time he was in Mersin. 
 
 
¶9. Evrensel / Restoration work in historic town 
of Zeugma  (in Gaziantep) is going to start on 
July 23. A group of professors from Ankara 
University will lead the project. 
HART