This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 003014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DS/DSS, DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, S/CT, NEA, 
NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, NEA/P, CA, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2013 
TAGS: AMGT PREL PTER YM SEC EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - 23 DECEMBER 2003 
 
REF: SANAA 2993 
 
Classified By: Ambassador E.J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
 ¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary:  Ambassador convened an EAC on December 
23 to discuss the change to Orange Alert and an update on 
recent stabbings of Westerners in Old Sanaa (ref).  EAC 
agreed that while none of the threat information causing the 
change to Orange Alert pointed specifically to Yemen, Embassy 
personnel would maintain vigilant security practices.  The 
Ministry of Interior arrested a suspect in the recent 
stabbings of Westerners on December 20 who has confessed to 
all three stabbings.  No stabbings have occurred since 
December 17.  Post will maintain stringent security 
practices, including Embassy security-escorted visits to the 
Old City until further notice. Key offices and personnel 
represented at the meeting included:  POL/ECON, CONS, RSO, 
MO, FPD, POL/MIL, DAO, OMC, and SOC YEMEN.  End Summary. 
 
------------ 
Orange Alert 
------------ 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ambassador briefed EAC on the reasons behind the 
change to Orange or "High" Alert.  He said that patterns of 
intelligence and a spike in terrorist communications could 
mean attacks abroad as well as in the U.S. in the coming 
weeks.  While listing several countries that warranted 
heightened concern that did not include Yemen, he noted that 
attacks could be anywhere and good security practices must be 
maintained. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ORCA said that while there is nothing to indicate 
a specific credible threat in Yemen, the takedown of the 
terrorist cell by ROYG authorities in September shows that 
terrorist motivation remains to conduct operations in Yemen. 
He said that while recent captures of wanted terrorists 
significantly dented their ability to fund terrorist actions 
and move weapons, anything could still happen and vigilance 
should be continued. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Alleged Perpetrator of Stabbings in Custody 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  A/RSO briefed EAC on the recent stabbings in Sanaa 
(reftel).  He said that the Ministry of Interior arrested one 
Yemeni male on December 20, who confessed to all three 
stabbings.  The MOI is continuing to investigate to ascertain 
whether others were involved in the incidents.  A/RSO noted 
no stabbings have occurred since December 17. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Post to Maintain Security Posture Despite Arrest 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5.  (C)  EAC members decided to maintain the increased 
security procedures on travel to the Old City for the time 
being, despite the arrest of a stabbing suspect, noting that 
prudence dictates being careful until Post can be more 
certain the threat is eliminated.  RSO has arranged 
security-escorted visits for Embassy personnel and their 
families to include two plain-clothed RSO Surveillance 
Detection (SD) officers to provide surveillance and early 
detection of possible threats.  MOI informed A/RSO that their 
significantly increased police presence in the Old City would 
be able to respond quickly to any incident. 
HULL