This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID - DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01 SITREP NO. 14 
 
REF: KUWAIT 1068 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 14 AS OF 2359 HOURS LOCAL, 1559 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME MARCH 25, 2003. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP (all reported times are 
Kuwait Local, GMT plus three): 
 
----------------- 
Security/Military 
----------------- 
 
1500 Duck and cover alert sounded. 
 
1509 All Clear sounded. 
 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
 
During 11-hour period (1200-2259), received 216 phone 
calls from mostly Kuwaiti citizens (and a few residents 
from other Arab countries) expressing their support for 
the United States and the American military campaign in 
Iraq.  Callers said they received messages on their 
cellular phones or from friends telling them to call the 
American and British Embassies to express their support. 
Several callers said that a pro-US march had been planned 
in Kuwait but then cancelled for security reasons, and 
that the phone calls were an alternate way to show their 
support for the United States and to pay their 
condolences for American servicemen killed in action. 
Every call received was positive. 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
 
Amcit from Redstone Arsenal called on behalf of the US 
Air Traffic Control to ask about visa requirements for 
Department of Defense civilian contractors in Kuwait. 
Spoke with Office of Military Cooperation-Kuwait (OMC-K) 
at the Embassy, which said this was a military question 
and that one of their staff would contact Amcit directly 
to discuss requirements. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: See above. 
 
JONES