This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS MARR KPKO IZ NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH PARLIAMENT SUPPORTS DEPLOYMENT OF TROOPS IN 
IRAQ 
 
REF: THE HAGUE 
 
¶1. Summary: On June 25, the Dutch parliament gave the go- 
ahead for deployment in the Stabilization Force of about 
1,100 troops in the Al-Muthanna province in Iraq.   The 
three government parties were supported by the opposition 
Labor party and by smaller parties on the center-right. 
Voting against were the opposition Socialist and Green Left 
parties, as well as four dissidents from the Labor Party and 
one from D66, a government party.  Defense Minister Kamp 
reassured the Parliament that adequate arrangements had been 
made for British and/or U.S. military assistance in the 
event the Dutch troops were to get into trouble.  The 650 
Dutch marines and 450 support troops are scheduled to arrive 
in Iraq by mid-July and to be operative in early August 
after a few weeks of acclimatization.  The initial 
deployment period is for six months.  End summary. 
 
¶2. At a June 25 hearing of the parliamentary foreign affairs 
and defense committees, Defense Minister Kamp convinced a 
large majority that adequate arrangements had been made to 
guarantee the safety of the Dutch troops in Iraq in a 
possible emergency situation.  "If they get into trouble, we 
can count on the British.  If necessary, there will be 
assistance from the British division within six hours and 
air support within 15 minutes."  Since the Dutch troops will 
operate under British command, "they feel fully responsible 
for us."  Besides, he said we have it "black on white" that 
they will come to our assistance.   Kamp did not anticipate, 
however, that it would come to that but he conceded that the 
mission was not without risks.  "This is not a holiday trip 
to Gran Canaria," he said.  Kamp assured the Parliament that 
the armament of the Dutch troops was sufficiently "robust." 
Unlike the situation in Srebrenica, he said the troops are 
not sent off "with their hands tied behind their back." 
Among the Dutch troops are sharp shooters and they will have 
heavy machine guns and anti-tank weapons.   Kamp also 
assured the Parliament that the troops had been well 
prepared for their mission.   Various spokesmen expressed 
concern about the death of six British soldiers earlier in 
the week.  Kamp, however, viewed it as an unfortunate 
incident and not as an organized campaign against the 
British. 
 
¶3. A minority of opponents regarded UNSC resolution 1483 as 
an insufficient basis for deployment, feared a repetition of 
the misfortunes of Dutch troops in Srebrenica and objected 
to what they viewed as the Dutch troops becoming part of the 
U.S.-UK occupation force.  "As long as this is no UN 
operation, we have no business there," said opposition Labor 
party deputy floorleader Adri Duivesteijn, one of four 
dissidents in the 42-member parliamentary group.  "What is 
the legitimacy of this occupation force after a war in which 
governments were deceived?" he questioned.  Minister Kamp 
sneered at SP spokesman Van Bommel that "parties that oppose 
peacekeeping no matter what have no right to speak."  He 
pointed out that a clear distinction is being made between 
countries that supply troops to the Stabilization Force and 
the U.S. and UK as occupying forces, even though the 
minister had to admit that this distinction may not be 
obvious to the average Iraqi.  Foreign Minister De Hoop 
Scheffer assured Parliament that the mission of the Dutch 
troops was to advance peace and stability in Iraq, but 
conceded that "serving the peace is more difficult than 
waging war." 
 
Sobel