This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  VATICAN 005164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE LEVIN; WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PINR PREL VT HA
SUBJECT: HAITI: HOLY SEE WORRIED ABOUT VIOLENCE, SEEKS 
BALANCE AMIDST DIVIDED CHURCH 
 
REF: A. A) PORT AU PRINCE 2208 
 
     ¶B. B) PORT AU PRINCE 2249 
     ¶C. C) PORT AU PRINCE 2188 
     ¶D. D) PORT AU PRINCE 2344 
     ¶E. E) PORT AU PRINCE 2345 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Brent Hardt for reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Vatican MFA Caribbean Affairs Office Director Giorgio 
Lingua said November 7 that the Holy See is "very worried" 
about the situation in Haiti.  He expressed concern about the 
disruption of an October 16 mass (ref a and b), and noted the 
potential for violence in the coming weeks (ref d).  Acting 
Foreign Minister Pietro Parolin emphasized in a November 13 
meeting the difficult balancing act that Vatican and 
Episcopal leadership in Haiti must perform in pressing for 
reform while avoiding instigating further violence.  He noted 
in this regard that the Haitian Episcopal Conference had 
signed on to the protest letter to the Haitian Government 
sent by the papal nuncio after the October 16 disturbance 
(ref b).  According to Lingua, the Haitian Catholic Church is 
struggling in general, with many people leaving the Church 
due to disillusionment with its handling of the Aristide 
crisis.  Though he acknowledged the challenges Aristide 
presented to those seeking reform, Lingua thought that 
pressure for increased democratic expression might be 
effective if it did not threaten Aristide's legitimacy.  End 
summary. 
 
--------------------- 
The Vatican's Concern 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) MFA Caribbean Affairs Office Director Giorgio Lingua 
told poloff November 7 that the Holy See is "very worried" 
about the situation in Haiti, following the disruption of the 
October 16 papal anniversary mass (ref a, b) and continuing 
violent incidents.  Lingua told us a Haitian MFA 
representative had called Papal Nuncio Luigi Bonazzi to 
express his regret for the incident at mass, but said that to 
his knowledge Aristide himself had not contacted any Vatican 
representative to comment on the incident.  Lingua expressed 
some satisfaction with news that Aristide had spoken to 
opposition leader Evans Paul after the incident, as the 
post-mass mugging of Evans Paul was also troubling to the 
Vatican.  The Holy See remains concerned about the potential 
for more violence in the lead-up to the bicentennial 
anniversary of the Battle of Vertieres on November 18 (ref d). 
 
--------------------------- 
A Church Balancing, Divided 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) According to Lingua, Aristide,s exploitation of some 
clergy members for propaganda purposes was taking its toll on 
the Haitian population.  Lingua said Haitians see "a Church 
divided," with some clergy supporting the Lavalas party and 
others against it.  Lingua claimed this lack of solidarity 
fostered disillusionment to the point where people were 
leaving the Church in increasing numbers. 
 
¶4. (C) When asked if the October 16 incident might prompt the 
Holy See to raise its voice more forcefully against 
Aristide's abuses, Lingua was noncommittal, saying the 
Vatican needed to balance pressure on Aristide against a 
delicate security situation on the ground.  Similarly, he 
said the Haitian bishops needed to tread lightly, as 
Aristide's unpredictable nature made such expression 
 
 
dangerous.  Holy See Acting Foreign Minister Pietro Parolin 
reiterated this point in a November 13 meeting with the 
Charge, while also noting that the bishops had signed on to 
Nuncio Bonazzi's protest letter to the GOH.  According to 
Lingua, the bishops "realize they should speak louder," but 
have to pick their spots carefully. 
 
-------------------- 
Episcopal Leadership 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Lingua told us the newly-appointed archbishop of Cap 
Haitien, Hubert Constant, was similarly in a difficult 
position.  Lingua said (protect) Constant had a "good spirit 
and pastoral character, but is conditioned by the presence -- 
in fact the omnipresence -- of Aristide."  Deputy FM Parolin 
was somewhat more positive on Constant, noting his role in 
protesting the October 16 incident.  On leadership in 
Port-au-Prince, Parolin confirmed that Coadjutor Bishop Serge 
Miot would succeed Archbishop Ligonde as head of the 
archdiocese when Archbishop Ligonde retires formally.  He 
also denied that Miot was too close to the Aristide camp, 
asserting that Miot, too, had played a role the post-October 
16 protest. 
 
--------------------- 
Comment: Where to go? 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Despite Lingua's rather somber assessment of the 
situation, he said the Holy See believes there are some 
glimmers of hope for progress Haiti.  He said the Vatican had 
noticed signs of increased discontent within the Lavalas 
party that could contribute to prospects for future reform. 
The best bet, he believed, was for further international 
pressure, especially from the United States, for increased 
democratic expression within the country -- without directly 
challenging Aristide's legitimacy.  This tracks with the 
conservative approach we have seen from the Holy See in such 
situations.  The Vatican is far more likely to take the 
long-term view than to invite confrontation -- or encourage 
local bishops to do so. 
 
¶7. (C) When looking at the big picture, Lingua said, 
effecting change in Haiti should be easier than in Cuba. 
Unlike Castro, Lingua observed, Aristide is not ideologically 
motivated.  "This is one person -- not a system," he added. 
Citing the effects on the U.S. of Haitian drug trafficking 
and illegal immigration, Lingua acknowledged the USG interest 
in Haiti, even beyond its humanitarian concerns.  Lingua 
noted with interest the arrival of Ambassador Foley in 
Port-au-Prince; consequently we passed him a copy of the 
Ambassador's ref E press statement. 
 
HARDT