This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003212 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
AIDAC 
 
FROM AMEMBASSY ROME 
 
USAID FOR ADMINISTRATOR NATSIOS, DCHA/AA WINTER, 
DCHA/D/OFDA MCCONNELL, DCHA/D/FFP LANDIS 
STATE FOR AS/AF KANSTEINER, DAS/PRM, IO/EDA 
USDA FOR FAS CHAMBLISS, TILSWORTH AND FAS/ICD KRAMER, 
LEBLANC 
USUN FOR AMBASSADOR NEGROPONTE AND MLUTZ 
NAIROBI FOR REDSO AND OFDA/ARO 
GENEVA FOR RMA AND NANCE KYLOH 
BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER 
NSC FOR JDWORKEN 
 
E.O.  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAGR AORC PREF EU WFP UN
SUBJECT:  WFP/LIBERIA'S CURRENT OPERATIONS AND PLANS 
TO RESPOND TO THE LARGER CRISIS 
 
REF:  A) State 196158 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Per ref A, US Mission queried WFP's Deputy 
Director for West Africa Arnold Verken who described 
both present and planned World Food Program 
operational steps which are described below. WFP is 
in the process of chartering a supply ship to be used 
as a mobile floating office off the coast of 
Monrovia. A rack up of WFP's equipment funding needs 
is provided in light of the growing magnitude of the 
present crisis. End Summary 
 
------------- 
Current Plans 
------------- 
 
¶2. WFP is currently providing food to refugees and 
IDPs in Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia from the 
current WFP West Africa Coastal Regional PRRO 
(January - December 2003).  Liberian refugees in Cote 
d'Ivoire are serviced under the WFP EMOP for Cote 
d'Ivoire (May 1 - December 31, 2003). Current 
Liberian refugee caseloads receiving WFP assistance 
are as follows: 70,000 in Guinea, 53,000 in Sierra 
Leone, and 35,000 in Cote d'Ivoire.  There are an 
estimated 175,000 plus IDPs in Liberia. 
 
¶3. The 2003 WFP PRRO is currently funded at 60 
percent (USD 34.4 million from a total of USD 57 
million), leaving USD 22.6 million yet to be funded. 
It should be noted that USAID/DCHA/Office of Food for 
Peace (FFP) is considering a new contribution of USD 
7 million to the PRRO, which is not included in the 
above figure.  Note: The level of WFP food 
distributions in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea 
has been lower than expected over the last year. 
Thus, WFP has accumulated food stocks that could have 
covered (with the 60 percent) the food requirements 
to almost the end of the year, if current levels had 
remained consistent throughout the rest of the year. 
WFP expects that the levels of distributions will now 
increase substantially, thus requiring the 40 percent- 
unfunded balance.  End Note. 
 
¶4. The Cote d'Ivoire pipeline is quite critical right 
now.  A pipeline break of oil, beans, and corn-soy 
blend (CSB) in July has forced WFP to cut rations of 
these commodities to IDPs, as well as refugees.  WFP 
has drawn against the Immediate Response Account 
(IRA), which must be repaid, to affect local 
purchases.  Bids were opened on 9 July for rice, 
maize meal, and oil.  Although the EMOP is funded at 
about 60 percent, recently announced major 
contributions from USAID and the European Union will 
not arrive until the last quarter of the year.ASSY ROME 
 
USAID FOR ADMINISTRATOR NATSIOS, DCHA/AA WINTER, 
DCHA/D/OFDA MCCONNELL, DCHA/D/FFP LANDIS 
STATE FOR AS/AF KANSTEINER, DAS/PRM, IO/EDA 
USDA FOR FAS CHAMBLISS, TILSWORTH AND FAS/ICD KRAMER, 
LEBLANC 
USUN FOR AMBASSADOR NEGRO 
 
 
¶5. The launch of a United Nations (UN) special appeal 
for Liberia in the near future is a distinct 
possibility, reports WFP, once access inside Liberia 
improves.  WFP, as well as other UN agencies, will 
then be able to make a better determination of the 
magnitude of the actual needs.  Some populations have 
been inaccessible for months, therefore it is likely 
that many will be in need of food assistance.  WFP 
anticipates malnutrition rates also being high. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Current Operations inside Liberia 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. After the first attacks in Monrovia in early June, 
WFP/Liberia distributed a 15-day ration to Internally 
Displaced Persons (IDPs), refugees, and other 
vulnerables in and near Monrovia between 13 - 23 
June, 2003, before a second attack occurred on June 
¶23.  The ration consisted of 1,800 kilocalories (kc) 
for IDPs and refugees (400 grams cereals, 50 grams 
pulses, 25 grams vegetable oil, 5 grams of salt) and 
1,880 kc for those in institutions and was provided 
to the following: 
 
-56,979 IDPs living in (schools, churches, etc) 
received 326 MT of food.  The estimated total of IDPs 
in these shelters is 76,273; 
 
-1,500 IDPs in existing camps received 11 MT; 
 
-6,189 Sierra Leonean Refugees received 45 MT; 
 
-2,610 beneficiaries in institutions, such as 
orphanages, hospitals, etc. received 39 MT. 
 
¶7. Following attacks in late June, WFP recommenced 
its distributions on 5 July, and as of 12 July 2003, 
the following had been provided: 
 
-39,311 IDPs in living in (schools, churches, etc); 
 
-849 beneficiaries in institutions received 18 MT. 
 
¶8. In addition ICRC was allocated 363 MT from WFP to 
also assist 50,000 IDPs in irregular shelters 
(schools, churches, etc.) and institutions. 
 
¶9. On July 11, WFP also began distributing food to 
Sierra Leonean refugees in camps.  Refugees in VOA, 
Banjor and Zuanah have been asked to receive their 
food at Banjor, while those in Samukai Town are being 
served in their camp. 
 
¶10. WFP emphasizes that as long as security remains 
problematic food assistance will remain limited and 
may not target the most in need. FOR AS/AF KANSTEINER, DAS/PRM, IO/EDA 
USDA FOR FAS CHAMBLISS, TILSWORTH AND FAS/ICD KRAMER, 
LEBLANC 
USUN FOR AMBASSADOR NEGROPONTE AND MLUTZ 
NAIROBI FOR REDSO AND OFDA/ARO 
GENEVA FOR RMA AND NANCE KYLOH 
BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Addressing Needs of New Liberian Refugees 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶11. Having just completed their Joint Assessment 
Mission (JAM), WFP and UNHCR expect there will be an 
additional influx of 20,000 Liberian refugees into 
Guinea and an additional influx of 30,000 Liberian 
refugees into Sierra Leone by the end of 2003. 
Additional Liberian refugees are also expected in 
western Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
¶12. Any additional needs that surface in Guinea, 
Sierra Leone, or Liberia during 2004 would be 
addressed through activation of the contingency 
provision in the new PRRO, just as WFP activated the 
contingency measure in its 2003 PRRO in February of 
this year for Liberia.  The contingency provision in 
the new PRRO is 150,000 USD for nine months and can 
be utilized in any of the three countries as needs 
arise. 
 
¶13. Under the Cote d'Ivoire EMOP, WFP has recently 
addressed the needs of a large influx of Liberian 
refugees that crossed the border into Cote d'Ivoire 
during June.  WFP opened up an office in Tabou town 
in order to assist the influx and immediately began 
providing 15-day rations.  Last week (July 3-9), WFP 
reported that Nicla refugee camp remains full of arms 
and like the June general food distribution, the July 
distribution witnessed shooting and harassment by 
uncontrolled Liberians present in the camp.  The 
pipeline problems mentioned in paragraph 4 are 
exacerbated by a growing number of beneficiaries. 
Although not yet a major problem among the refugee 
populations in Cote d'Ivoire, malnutrition rates are 
increasingly worrisome.  Severely malnourished 
children under selected feeding programs by Medecins 
Sans Frontiere and Action Contre La Faim presently 
exceed 1,000. 
 
------------ 
Next Steps 
------------ 
 
¶14. WFP views the situation in Liberia as a major 
humanitarian crisis and is building its strategy on 
the premise that basic security conditions will allow 
it to work. Once access is permitted, WFP foresees 
the need for a sizeable intervention for which 
additional resources would be required.  Under the 
best case scenario giving access to new areas, WFP 
intends to open six operational sub-offices: Harper, 
Zwedru, Ganta, Phebe, Tubmanburg and Voinjama. If 
basic security does not exist, its action will be 
limited, given the significant difficulties in 
reaching all intended beneficiaries. 
 
¶15. A sub-regional contingency planning exercise 
 
 
under the OCHA umbrella is underway.  Various case 
scenarios are being discussed, reports WFP, but was 
unable to provide further details at this time. 
Cross border operations are also being considered 
within the overall access strategy and were broadly 
discussed during the recent UN Humanitarian Inter- 
Agency Mission.  This mission, led by Carolyn 
McAskie, will debrief in Dakar the week of July 14. 
 
¶16. WFP is in the process of chartering a supply ship 
to be used as a mobile floating office off the coast 
of Monrovia.  A similar ship was used for the same 
purpose during the previous crisis in Monrovia in 
¶1996.  WFP hopes to have the ship in Abidjan in two 
weeks, where she would load supplies and staff 
(unless the staff are allowed by UNSECOORD to proceed 
to Liberia before the ship arrives), and sail to 
Monrovia.  It would be on hire for an initial period 
of two months.  WFP intends to share the vessel with 
OCHA and UNICEF, however, the accommodation capacity 
is limited to 32 passengers. 
 
¶17. The following needs are anticipated by WFP: 
 
a) Additional food quantities would be required, 
triggering a budget revision of the current PRRO, and 
perhaps a flash appeal; 
 
b) Chartering the ship to serve as a floating UN 
office for two months, about USD 350,000; 
 
c) Replace logistics equipment that has been looted: 
Trucks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . about USD 900,000 
(commercial trucks are not available) 
4x4 Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .USD 160,000 
Mobile storage units  . . . . . . . . . . USD 112,000 
Port equipment (1 toplifter & 2 tractors) USD 400,000 
Generator sets . . . . . . . . . . . . .  USD 120,000 
Spare parts for trucks . . . . . . . . . .USD  60,000 
Mobile workshop  . . . . . . . . . . . . .USD  50,000 
Communications equipment  . . . . . . . . USD 550,000 
(incl for 6 sub-offices) 
 
-------------------------- 
Addressing Needs of IDPs 
-------------------------- 
 
¶18. OCHA is currently the lead agency on IDPs.  WFP 
reports there is a common feeling that OCHA capacity 
needs to be bolstered to address the magnitude of the 
current crisis. 
 
¶19. Minimize considered. TAMLYN 
NNNN 
	2003ROME03212 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED