This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 001200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, EB/TRA 
STATE PLEASE PASS TDA 
ROME FOR FAA 
PARIS FOR TSA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ASEC ATRN TU
SUBJECT: AVIATION SAFETY AND SECURITY MEETING IN ISTANBUL 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 553 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) This cable contains an action request.  See para 6. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  FAA-funded experts provided guidance on 
international aviation safety and security systems to 
approximately 70 Turkish government officials at a regional 
meeting February 19-21.  FAA and Turkish civil aviation 
officials agreed that FAA consultations on aviation safety 
oversight would take place May 22 in Ankara (reftel).  End 
summary. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Turkish Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA) hosted a regional meeting on Aviation Safety and 
Security February 19-21 in Istanbul.  The meeting, which was 
sponsored by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and 
George Washington University Consortium, was designed to 
provide senior government officials guidance on implementing 
ICAO safety and security requirements.  FAA-funded experts 
from the United States outlined the critical elements of 
international aviation safety and security systems, including 
a country,s obligations under ICAO, and guidelines for 
meeting those obligations. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Approximately 70 Turkish officials attended the 
meeting, including 42 from the DGCA, 7 from the State 
Airports Authority, 2 from Customs, and 19 from the Turkish 
National Police.  Senior FAA Representative Greg Joyner, 
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) Representative 
Jess Presas, and embassy aviation officer attended for the 
U.S.  Representatives from the Polish and Israeli Civil 
Aviation Authorities also participated in the meeting. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Following up on previous discussions with Director 
General Cebeci (reftel), Joyner and DGCA representatives 
agreed that FAA/DGCA consultations on aviation safety 
oversight would take place May 22 in Ankara.  Joyner also 
told DGCA officials that FAA hoped to provide technical 
training to DGCA inspectors via a grant by the Trade and 
Development Agency (TDA).  DGCA officials emphasized to 
emboff that such training would be extremely valuable and 
greatly appreciated. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Action request:  The Turkish DGCA is working hard to 
implement ICAO recommendations before the March ICAO audit 
and May FAA consultations.  If TDA and FAA are able to 
provide technical training to DGCA inspectors, it would be 
helpful to do so as soon as possible.  Post would appreciate 
any steps TDA and FAA could take to expedite such training. 
PEARSON