This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0152 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          JUNE 05, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for June 05, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2.  Cumhuriyet: A political party, under the name 
of "Democratic Republic Party," will be founded 
to substitute DEHAP. The chief prosecutor of the 
Supreme Court had sued DEHAP and demanded its 
permanent closure some time ago. The case is 
still pending. Taking into account the likely 
closure of DEHAP prior to local elections in 
2004, former HADEP members had made preparations 
for founding a new party under Ahmet Turan 
Demir's leadership. Demir was one of HADEP's 
former chairs. The petition for founding the new 
party will be submitted to the Interior Ministry 
tomorrow. Demir said the new party would follow a 
democratic socialist line. 
 
 
¶3.  Sabah: A Republican Peoples Party (CHP) 
parliamentarian from Diyarbakir, Muhsin Kocyigit, 
in a resolution to the Grand National Assembly, 
asked the Interior Minister if  beating and 
placing human excrement on the faces of two 
students in Hani (Diyarbakir) was true or not. It 
is alleged that the police detained, beat, and 
placed human excrement on the faces of two 
students for making insinuating remarks in 
Kurdish to their female teacher at Children's Day 
celebrations on April 23. 
 
 
¶4.  Evrensel/Milliyet: The Diyarbakir governorate 
investigating the (above) case decided that there 
was no solid evidence that the policemen in Hani 
had beaten, toured and placed excrement on the 
faces of students. The governorate dropped 
bringing the policemen to trial, and denied all 
the students' allegations. Based upon the 
governorate's decision, the office of the Chief 
Public Prosecutor in Hani also announced that 
there was no evidence that required bringing 
public charges against the policemen. At a court 
hearing in Hani, the teacher, who had sued the 
students, withdrew her complaint. The court 
adjourned the case to an unspecified date to 
listen to the students' account of the event. The 
students attorney, Zulfu Dundar, sued the 
policemen, Hasan Sezgin and Ergun Sahin. 
 
 
¶5.  Evrensel: At a press meeting in Human Rights 
Association's Chapter in Sanliurfa, the Urfa 
Democracy Platform, announced that the "repent 
law" proposed for the Kurdish issue; the 
personnel law damaging reconciliation at job 
sites; the law opening the path for depriving 
laborers of unions; the local administration law; 
and the isolation applied in F-type prisons; had 
increased tension in society. The spokeswoman for 
the platform, Gulay Koca, proposed declaring a 
general amnesty for installing peace and order in 
lieu of the repent law under consideration. 
DEHAP's provincial office in Diyarbakir launched 
a three-day signature campaign demanding a 
general amnesty. DEHAP's Provincial Chairman, 
Firat Anli, asked all segments of society to be 
sensitive about resolving the Kurdish issue, and 
to participate in the signature campaign. 
¶6.  Hurriyet/Milliyet: Sergeant Matthias Arnt, 
24, was stabbed to death at Incirlik AFB on May 
¶27. It is suspected that his wife, Latasha Arnt, 
had killed the sergeant.  Latasha was taken to 
the US for trial in California. The Military 
Police are taking care of the crime. In the 
meantime, FBI detectives began an investigation. 
Sergeant Arnt's body was taken to Germany for an 
autopsy. 
 
 
¶7.  Turkiye: The Provincial National Education 
Director of Hakkari, Durmus Ozdemir, said he 
needed 706 teachers in the province in order to 
fill in the gap. The national Education Ministry 
announced it would hire twenty thousand teachers 
nationwide. Ozdemir said around four hundred of 
one thousand four hundred sixty teachers 
currently employed in Hakkari would be 
transferred elsewhere. He added that he needed at 
least 650 or 700 teachers in assorted branches, 
and 150 or 200 classroom teachers. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
¶8.  Dunya: The General Director of the Iron and 
Steel Plant in Iskenderun (Isdemir), Atamer 
Giyici, said they took the first step for 
modernization and transformation at the plant. 
Giyici said they would invest USD 300 million for 
bringing fine casting technology, and formally 
invited companies interested in the projects 
through the Financial Times and the Official 
Gazette on May 16 to bid, and would receive bids 
until the first week of June. Giyici said USD 700 
million was required in order to eliminate the 
disorder in long and flat iron production in 
Turkey. The plant would double production after 
the investment, and added that Isdemir had made a 
profit of USD 2 million during the first quarter 
of 2003, and aimed to increase its annual 
capacity to 2.1 million tons. 
HOLTZ