This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 004385 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL TU SY IS KWBG
SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER DELIVERS STRONG MESSAGE TO SYRIAN 
PRESIDENT ASSAD 
 
 
(U) CLASSIFIED BY DCM ROBERT S. DEUTSCH FOR REASONS 1.5(B) & 
(D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) MFA Director General for Middle East Tahsin Burcuoglu 
briefed DCM July 11 on the July 10 telephone call between PM 
Erdogan and Syrian President Assad.  Burcuoglu said that 
during the June visit of U/S Ziyal to Washington, Turkey had 
been asked by the U.S to pass a strong message to the 
Syrians.  In Erdogan's call he told the Syrian President that 
they needed to adjust their attitude on Iraq to be supportive 
of the coalition; and on the Israeli/Palestinian issue to be 
supportive of the roadmap and the peace initiative. 
Furthermore he told Assad Syria needed to take steps against 
terrorism to demonstrate to the U.S. that they were in the 
camp of peace and stability. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Assad's response was non-specific but positive, 
Burcuoglu said.  Furthermore Assad promised to send Erdogan a 
more complete response probably in connection with the visit 
July 28-29 to Ankara of Syrian Prime Minister Muhammad Miro. 
Burcuoglu noted that the latter visit was intended to be more 
economic than political but he promised to inform us as soon 
the promised response was received. 
 
 
PEARSON