This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301024Z Sep 03UNCLAS HALIFAX 000308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON AEMR CASC ASEC CA
SUBJECT: THANKS A LOT, JUAN 
 
REF: HILL - OPS CENTER TELCONS 9/28 AND 29 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Hurricane Juan crashed through Nova Scotia and 
Prince Edward Island during the late evening/early morning of 
September 28/29, leaving two dead, two missing and millions of 
dollars in property damage.  We have no reports of AMCIT deaths 
or injuries.  Consulate is open to the public but will be at 
reduced staffing levels, probably for the remainder of the week. 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Hurricane Juan made an unwelcome visit to Nova Scotia and 
Prince Edward Island September 28/29.  The storm killed two, 
downed trees and power lines and did millions of dollars worth 
of property damage.  Two fishermen are also missing.  We have no 
reports of AMCIT deaths or injuries.  Coastal areas and moored 
boats were particularly hard-hit; a number of buildings suffered 
extensive damage when high winds ripped off roofing materials 
and allowed rain to flood in.  Several hundred thousand people 
and businesses were left without power.  Telephone lines seemed 
to do better in the storm than power lines, so some people still 
have phone service at home.  Although the cell phone system was 
overwhelmed at several points on September 29 on the whole it 
functioned reasonably well. 
 
¶3.  Cleanup efforts are underway, but the power company cautions 
that it may be the end of the week before many people have their 
electricity restored.  Maine's Governor Baldacci called Nova 
Scotia Premier Hamm in the wake of the storm to offer 
assistance; power line repair crews from Maine will be arriving 
to assist their Nova Scotia Power counterparts.  New Brunswick 
has also sent repair crews to Nova Scotia and PEI.  600 military 
personnel have been assigned to cleanup operations.  Halifax's 
downtown core has electricity and public transport has resumed 
on a limited schedule.  Hospitals are open although many 
elective procedures are being postponed.  Municipal, provincial 
and federal governments have told non-emergency personnel to 
stay home to keep roads clear for cleanup crews. 
 
¶4.  CONSULATE OPERATIONS:  We have been in touch with all but 
one Consulate staff member; all are safe, although only one has 
electricity as of Tuesday morning and several do not have phone 
service.  Main power was out until the afternoon of September 29 
in the office tower where the Consulate is located, but Consul 
was able to verify that there was no damage to our facility and 
that alarms were operating on battery power.  With power now 
restored we have re-opened for business but will operate at 
reduced staffing until hazards are cleared from the roads and 
travel becomes safer for our personnel.  We anticipate resuming 
full operations NLT October 6.  Government-owned Consul 
General's residence was hemmed in by fallen trees but suffered 
no damage in the storm, although it has been without power since 
about 11:30PM Sunday night.  Liaison with RCMP protection and 
technical services branches has been excellent throughout the 
emergency.