This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261022Z Sep 03UNCLAS ABUJA 001668 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM NI
SUBJECT: VP CANDIDATE AND FORMER SENATE PRESIDENT OKADIGBO 
DEAD 
 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy learned early September 26 that former Senate 
President and ANPP Vice Presidential candidate Chuba Okadigbo 
passed away in the early morning hours.  No official 
announcement has been made as of mid-morning September 26. 
 
 
¶2. (U) In spite of rumors already beginning to circulate, it 
appears that he died of natural causes.  Okadigbo took part 
in the massive political rally in Kano on September 23 and is 
reported to have suffered from exposure to the heat during 
the event (septel).  He traveled from Kano to Abuja with his 
running mate Muhammadu Buhari in anticipation of attending 
the electoral tribunal hearing from September 25 (septel) on 
the ANPP's case against President Obasanjo and the PDP.  His 
doctor advised against exerting himself, however, so he 
remained at his residence where he later passed away. 
 
 
¶3. (U) COMMENT:  In Nigeria, everything is assumed to be a 
conspiracy in the absence of any proof to the contrary. 
Politically, his death is not significant to Buhari's efforts 
to force the GON to hold new elections.  His body is at the 
government hospital in Abuja, but the ANPP could try to stage 
an event similar to the rally prior to the April 2003 
elections commemorating the assassination of Marshall Harry, 
one of Buhari's leading southern Nigeria supporters. 
MEECE