This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0274 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL PHUM ASEC IZ TU ADANA
SUBJECT:  UPTICK IN VIOLENT CLASHES IN SOUTHEAST 
          TURKEY 
 
 
REF:  A) ADANA 271 B) ADANA 272 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Southeastern Turkey has seen 
an increase in violent clashes since the 
beginning of September. According to credible 
press reporting which the consulate has been able 
to corroborate on multiple occasions, there have 
been ten significant clashes resulting in 
multiple deaths and injuries, of which eight 
appear to be at PKK/KADEK initiative and one 
which appears to be at the GoT's instigation. 
One violent attack in Tunceli is difficult to 
attribute; Tunceli in the past has seen both 
DHKP-C and PKK/KADEK activity.  In the preceding 
months of July-August, there were six total 
attacks, while there were ten attacks in May-June 
¶2003.  While the scale and scope of the attacks 
are still limited, the PKK/KADEK appears to be 
taking the initiative to attack what it considers 
to be vulnerable GoT targets in Bingol, Hakkari, 
Diyarbakir, Mardin, Adana and Agri provinces, as 
well as along the Tunceli/Bingol provincial 
border.  Finally, PKK/KADEK has declared to the 
press that it has established a "new unit" 
calling itself the "People's Protection Force." 
It appears to have undertaken at least one 
offensive operation, but corroboration of 
information on both the unit and this attack 
currently is limited.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
2.(SBU)  Most of the recent attacks have been in 
rural or village areas, although two attacks 
recently have occurred in urban zones bordering 
larger population centers.  For example, on 
October 15, "terrorists," widely considered to be 
PKK/KADEK-associated, attacked a Jandarma minibus 
in the Kurkculer suburb of Adana at approximately 
2000L.  The attack occurred near an Adana prison 
and the minibus may have been carrying Jandarma 
personnel who had completed a shift change at the 
detention facility.  One Jandarma soldier was 
reportedly killed in the attack and two more were 
reportedly injured.  Police report finding 
approximately 65 shell casings in the vicinity of 
the attack site in post-attack investigations 
(REFS.A-B). 
 
 
3.(SBU) Additionally, there have been numerous 
clashes between DEHAP protestors and GOT security 
forces which have resulted in arrests and or 
violence resulting in non-lethal injuries.  These 
clashes have taken place in Mersin, Adana, 
Diyarbakir, Gaziantep, Siirt, Sirnak, Van and 
Mardin provinces. 
 
 
4.(SBU)  There are four reports of civilians 
killed or seriously injured by stepping on 
landmines or encountering unexploded ordnance in 
parts of regions associated with past PKK/KADEK 
activity. 
 
 
5.(SBU) Finally, PKK/KADEK has declared to 
friendly press outlets that it has established a 
"new unit" calling itself the "People's 
Protection Force (Heze Parastine Gel in 
Kermanji)" to retaliate against GoT security 
forces it considers to have used force "against 
peaceful Kurdish demonstrators."  This unit, 
however, also has claimed responsibility for an 
Oct. 13 attack in a rural area of Hakkari linked 
to an earlier PKK/KADEK cadre clash with security 
forces.  Reportedly up to ten GoT forces were 
killed during this attack and several more 
wounded.  Consulate corroboration on this unit's 
alleged attack is limited. 
 
 
6.(SBU)  Comment: Who has instigated these 
clashes is not clear, but the restart of violent 
attacks by PKK/KADEK plays into the hands of 
those in the Turkish State who want to keep 
southeastern Turkey under tight security control. 
REID