This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 THE HAGUE 002707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISP 
JOINT STAFF FOR DD PMA-A FOR WTC 
COMMERCE FOR BIS (GOLDMAN) 
NSC FOR CHUPA 
WINPAC FOR LIEPMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL RS CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC):  WRAP-UP FOR 
THE EIGHTH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES (CSP-8) 
 
REF: STATE 295421 
 
 This is CWC-113-03. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U)  The U.S. accomplished all of its primary objectives 
at the Oct. 20-24 OPCW Eighth Conference of States Parties 
(CSP-8).  The Conference approved the U.S. request for an 
extension of its 45% destruction deadline to December 2007 
and extended in principle the U.S. 100% destruction deadline. 
 There was agreement on the 2004 OPCW budget with an increase 
of 6.7%, retention of the 2001 cash surplus, and future 
consideration of steps for retention of Article IV/V 
surpluses.  Action plans on universality and on national 
implementation under Article VII were also approved.  The 
ICRC request to address the CSP was not/not approved. 
Finally, on the issue of the ILO decision regarding former 
Director-General (DG) Bustani, the Conference Chairperson 
(Ariffin/Malaysia) issued a statement by which the Conference 
approved a proposal instructing the OPCW's lawyers to attempt 
to negotiate a settlement and, if settlement efforts failed, 
reserving to the OPCW the right to seek reconsideration by 
the ILO Administrative Tribunal of the amount of damages 
awarded.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
U.S. EXTENSION REQUEST 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The U.S. and Russia came to agreement on our 
respective CW destruction extension requests.  The CSP 
approved the U.S. request to extend its intermediate 45% CW 
destruction deadline to December 31, 2007 as well as Russia's 
20% CW deadline to April 29, 2007.  The Conference also took 
a decision to extend Russia's 45% and 100% destruction 
deadlines "in principle."  In order to satisfy WEOG and other 
States Parties' concerns regarding the United States' 
intermediate 45% deadline going beyond the final deadline of 
April 29, 2007, the U.S. agreed also to extend its final 
destruction deadline "in principle". 
 
¶3.  (U) The primary source of disagreement between the U.S. 
and Russia was the matter of including site-visits as a 
condition for supporting each other's extension requests. 
The U.S., as well as a number of WEOG members, believe that 
site-visits are an important transparency feature that ought 
to be maintained as a condition for approving Russia's 20% 
extension request as well as for its "in principle" extension 
requests.  However, concerns over reciprocity resulted in the 
U.S. accepting Russia's condition of no site visits for 
either side, as well as discontinuing extra-Convention CW 
destruction program reporting requirements. 
 
¶4.  (U) At the eleventh hour, the French insisted, as a 
condition for joining consensus, that text from paragraph 28, 
Part IV(A) of the Verification Annex, dealing with a State 
Party's requirement to report to the Executive Council (EC)on 
its final phase of destruction activity, be inserted in the 
decision document.  The French stated that the added text 
would provide reassurance to concerned States Parties that 
Russia's 100% CW "in principle" extension meets the same 
transparency measures applied to an approved date positive 
for extension.   The French also stated that the added text 
lessens the ambiguity many WEOG members believe exist with 
the extension "in principle" concept. 
 
---------------- 
2004 OPCW BUDGET 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  (U)  The Conference adopted a 73,153,390 Euro budget for 
2004 in its Decision on the Programme and Budget and Working 
Capital Fund (C-8/DEC/CPR.17).  This came on the final day of 
CSP-8, only hours after the Director-General, the Director of 
Administration (Schulz/US), the budget facilitator 
(Beerworth/Germany), and U.S. and other key contributors 
hammered out a package that also included a Decision on 
Withholding Distribution of the 2001 Cash Surplus 
(C-8/DEC/CRP.8/Rev.1) and a note by the Director-General 
(C-8/DG.6).  The DG's Note explains how he proposes to 
deliver the full core program of OPCW activities while also 
providing an additional 250,000 Euros for International 
Cooperation and Assistance, all within a 6.7% overall budget 
increase (below his earlier bottom line of 7.36%).  All 
requirements established in guidance were met, including 
language in the budget decision document concerning 
consultants, indications of where reductions will be made to 
reach the 6.7% budget level, and a clear marker laid 
concerning our desire for more emphasis on OCPF inspections 
in future years. 
 
¶6.  (U)  This package calls for establishing a special 
account funded by withholding the remainder of the 2001 cash 
surplus with a separate CSP decision.  Of the surplus, 1.355 
million Euros is to cover the costs of implementing the 
previous CSP's tenure decision; and a further 250,000 Euros 
will finance the ICA increase to be returned back to the 
surplus through efficiency savings in the course of 2004. 
The DG is authorized to draw on the rest of the surplus to 
maintain the ICA and inspection programs or for other 
exceptional needs, subject to prior approval by the Executive 
Council, and is to report on the use of the funds to the 
Ninth CSP. 
 
¶7.  (U)  On Article IV and V Income, the Conference requested 
the Executive Council and the Director-General to examine 
ways to enhance financial stability and facilitate smoother 
program delivery.  This decision drew on the EC's decision to 
study Article IV and V funding options including the possible 
establishment of a Program Stabilization Fund. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
ARTICLE VII - NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION ACTION PLAN 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8.  (U) The Conference adopted the Plan of Action recommended 
by the October 21 special session of the Executive Council. 
At the start of the CSP, India and Iran had threatened to 
block consensus on the document.  As approved by Washington, 
Ambassador Javits, the facilitator (Consuelo Femenia/Spain) 
and members of the U.S. delegation met with Indian and 
Iranian delegation members to reach agreement on two critical 
issues:  1) that "it is imperative" that member states 
fulfill obligations under Article VII by the CSP-10 deadline, 
and 2) that the Conference, at CSP-10, will "consider and 
decide upon appropriate measures, if necessary" to address a 
States Party's failure to meet this obligation.  The Indian 
and Iranian delegation were amenable to this implementation 
as an important obligation without the direct or indirect 
reference to Article XII, thus leaving the option open for 
the Conference to, as the situation calls for, decide upon 
further assistance, extension of timeline or punitive 
measures. 
 
------------------------ 
UNIVERSALITY ACTION PLAN 
------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (U) The CSP endorsed the Universality Action Plan adopted 
by the second Special session of the EC convened during the 
Conference.  The final text, worked out in two intense 
informal discussions late in the week, includes the two key 
elements sought by the USG, designating "points of contact" 
by States Parties for the effective promotion of 
universality, and calling on the Technical Secretariat to 
prepare a comprehensive annual document that will "set 
indicative targets for increased membership." 
 
¶10.  (U) The Conference noted the DG's report on 
implementation of the CSP-7 recommendation on ensuring the 
universality of the Convention.  It accepted South Korea's 
proposal not to adopt a similar recommendation in 2003 in 
light of the adoption of a more concrete Action Plan by the 
EC. 
 
-------------------------------- 
REQUESTS TO ATTEND/ADDRESS CSP-8 
-------------------------------- 
¶11.  (SBU)  Iraq and Libya were granted non-speaking, 
observer status for the Conference.  Prior to the opening of 
the CSP, Amb. Javits met with the CSP-7 Chairman 
(Djoudi/Algeria) to emphasize the U.S. objection to the 
request from the ICRC to address the Conference (reftel). 
Javits noted that the States Parties had a full agenda for 
CSP-8.  The Chairman suggested a compromise by which the ICRC 
would be allowed to speak "if time allows," recognizing that 
there would be no time available.  Javits objected to the 
proposal, stressing the point that acceding to the ICRC 
request even in principle would set a bad precedent.  The 
OPCW would not be able to deny other NGOs or international 
organizations the right to address future Conferences. 
Should the States Parties wish to hear from the ICRC or some 
other body, stressed Javits, then the member states can 
invite that organization to speak.  The General Committee 
agreed to deny the ICRC request. 
 
---------------- 
BUSTANI JUDGMENT 
---------------- 
 
¶12.  (U)  The Conference addressed the Bustani issue late on 
October 24th.  Through a statement delivered by the 
Conference Chairperson, the Conference approved a proposal 
instructing the OPCW's lawyers to attempt to negotiate a 
settlement, and, if settlement efforts failed, reserving to 
the OPCW the right to seek reconsideration by the ILO 
Administrative Tribunal of the amount of damages awarded. 
Following Conference approval of the Chair's proposal, the 
Brazilian representative stated that he could not associate 
himself with the proposal, and claimed that ILOAT awards are 
required to be implemented immediately under international 
law. 
 
¶13.  (U)  Brazil asserted that failure to make immediate 
payment was a violation of international law, and strongly 
implied that the OPCW and the Conference were guilty of such 
a violation.  The Brazilian representative requested that his 
statement be included in the Conference Report.  Canada noted 
that it was concerned by the fundamental question of the 
Tribunal's jurisdiction, but concluded it would not block 
consensus in view of the general support for the Chair's 
proposal.  Ambassador Javits then delivered the USG response, 
cleared in Washington, refuting the implication that the 
OPCW's conduct could in any sense be viewed as a violation of 
international law.  He noted that the process outlined by the 
Chair is fully consistent with existing legal procedures and 
that it would be premature and imprudent for the OPCW to make 
any payment decision, before all proper options could be 
explored, including reducing the damages.  Ambassador Javits 
also noted the rashness implicit in Mr. Bustani's filing of 
an execution order with the ILOAT on Monday, October 20, 
before the Conference had even had time to address the 
matter.  Ambassador Javits further stated his understanding 
that the Chairperson's statement regarding the OPCW 
"reserving for itself" the right to seek a review meant that 
the Organization will indeed return to the ILO on the issue 
of material damages should the negotiations fail, to which 
there was no objection stated.  The Ambassador requested that 
his statement also be added to the Conference Report. 
 
¶14.  (U)  The following are the results of other agenda items. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
AGENDA ITEM ONE - OPENING OF THE SESSION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U)  CSP-7 Chairman Djoudi opened the session.  The 
Conference approved the participation of nine NGOs and two 
chemical industry associations.  The ICRC was included in the 
list of "international organizations, specialized agencies, 
and other international bodies" attending the CSP. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
AGENDA ITEM TWO - ELECTION OF THE CHAIRMAN 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶16.  (U)  The conference elected by acclamation as 
Chairperson Ambassador Noor Farida Arrifin of Malaysia. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
AGENDA ITEM THREE - ELECTION OF VICE CHAIRMEN AND OTHER 
OFFICERS 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶17.  (U)  The CSP elected the following ten States Parties as 
Vice-Chairs: Bosnia, Guatemala, India, Japan, Mexico, 
Nigeria, Poland, South Africa, Switzerland and the United 
States.  Ambassador Djoudi was elected Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
AGENDA ITEM FOUR - ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (U)  The Agenda was adopted without debate. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
AGENDA ITEM FIVE - ORGANIZATION OF WORK AND ESTABLISHMENT OF 
SUBSIDIARY BODIES 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶19.  (U)  The agenda item was adopted without debate. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
AGENDA ITEM SIX - APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶20.  (U)  The following ten members of the Credentials 
Committee were elected to hold office until the next CSP: 
Austria, Cameroon, Cuba, Czech Republic, Jordan, Namibia, 
Pakistan, Portugal, Ukraine and Uruguay. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
AGENDA ITEM SEVEN - STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶21.  (U) In his opening statement, DG Pfirter said 
destruction activities were continuing at "a good pace" and 
noted that on average one new State Party had acceded to the 
CWC every month over the preceding year.  He alluded to calls 
from the Staff Council to suspend implementation of the 
previous CSP's decision to impose tenure limits on OPCW staff 
until the ILO Administrative Tribunal ruled on the suits 
brought by a number of OPCW inspectors whose contracts had 
not been renewed.  The DG noted that implementation had 
already begun and that any move to suspend further action 
would have to be taken by the CSP, which had made the initial 
decision.  No States Party moved to suspend implementation. 
 
---------------------------------- 
AGENDA ITEM EIGHT - GENERAL DEBATE 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶22.  (U)  Ambassador Javits delivered the U.S. statement, 
which has been included on the OPCW Internet site for the 
Conference.  A total of 38 other delegations made statements. 
 Most noteworthy were statements from Arab delegations 
(Algeria, Qatar) alleging that Israel had extensive chemical 
and other WMD stocks, and the statement from Panama that 
referred to the issue of San Jose Island. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
AGENDA ITEM NINE - STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶23.  (U)  The Conference noted the Report on National 
Implementation Measures (C-8/DG.5 dated 18 September 2003) 
after agreeing to minor corrections to the text as requested 
by Belgium and Iran.  Iran noted that Annex 1 did not 
correctly reflect the contents of its Note Verbale to the TS 
and requested that it be revised to show that its legislation 
covers all areas key to enforcement and that the text of its 
measures to date has been provided. 
¶24.  (U)  The Conference noted the Report by the DG on 
Implementation of the Regime governing the Handling of 
Confidential information by the Technical Secretariat in 2002 
 
SIPDIS 
(EC-32/DG.16 C-8/DG.1, dated 12 March 2003), presented to the 
Conference in accordance with paragraph A.3 of the 
Confidentiality Annex. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶25. (U)  The Conference noted the Note by the DG on a 
non-exhaustive list of illustrative examples of chemical 
weapons that meet the definitions contained in Article II, 
subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of the Convention (C-8/DG.2, 
dated 10 April 2003). 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
AGENDA ITEM TEN - REPORT OF THE OPCW FOR 2002 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶26.  (U)  The Conference approved the draft report of the 
OPCW on the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention 
in 2002 (EC-34/4/C-8/CRP.1, dated September 2003).  The 
German Delegation requested that the draft report be amended 
to reflect that the FRG submitted Article 10 declarations 
during 2002.  The German amendment was also approved by the 
Conference. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
AGENDA ITEM ELEVEN - REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶27.  (U)  The Conference noted the report of the Executive 
Council on the performance of its activities in the period 
from 17 July 2002 to 27 June 2003 (EC-34/3  C-8/3, dated 23 
September 2003).  The report was introduced by the EC 
Chairman, Ambassador Petr Kubernat of the Czech Republic, who 
also introduced the recommendations of the Council that 
required the attention of the Conference, including those 
made after the cut-off date for the above report. 
 
¶28.  (U)  Among the noteworthy items recommended after the 
cut-off date for the above referenced report, is the report 
of the visit by the EC Chairman and by the States Parties 
Experts Group to the Gorniy CW destruction facility and to 
construction sites in Kambarka and Shchuch'ye in the Russian 
Federation on 6-10 October 2003.  In his introduction, the 
Chairman specifically referenced the report's observation 
that Russia's efforts to destroy 20% of its Category 1 
chemical weapons stockpiles by the 29 April 2007 deadline it 
has proposed may be hindered by delays caused, inter alia, by 
slippages in construction schedules and in construction 
starting dates, by financial constraints, and, possibly, by 
the need to provide social infrastructure to local 
populations in advance of the construction of CWDF's. 
 
¶29.  (SBU)  The Conference approved the request by "another 
States Party" for an extension of its 45% destruction 
deadline. 
 
¶30.  (U)  The Conference granted final approval to the 
procedures for revising the technical specifications for 
approved equipment, approved provisionally by the 31st 
Executive Council (EC-31/DEC.8, dated 12 December 2002).  The 
final approval is contained in C-8/DEC/CRP.6, dated 10 
October 2003. 
 
¶31.  (U)  The Conference adopted a decision (on "Boundaries 
of Production") on understandings regarding declarations 
under Article VI and Parts VII and VII of the Verification 
Annex to the Convention (C-8/DEC/CRP.13/Rev.1, dated 22 
October 2003). 
 
¶32.  (U)  At an October 24 Special Session, the Executive 
Council considered and deferred a decision on the issue of 
Captive Use until its next regular session.  The Indian, 
Chinese and Russian Federation delegations blocked consensus 
on grounds that last-minute changes to the text made by the 
facilitator (Rudduck/UK) as a result of sidebar discussions 
during the Conference would need to be reviewed by technical 
experts in capitals.  Late changes made to the text clarify 
the exclusion of transient chemicals from declaration, 
drawing upon text already approved in the Boundaries of 
Production decision text approved by the Conference.  The 
facilitator did not circulate a text prior to the session to 
allow for sufficient review by States Parties, opting instead 
to include announcement of the changes during his statement 
to the EC. 
 
¶33.  (U)  The Conference noted the audited financial 
statements of the OPCW for the year 2002, including the 
response of the DG to the External Auditor's report 
(EC-33/DG.5 C-8/DG.3, dated 10 June 2003).  These audited 
financial statements, and the External Auditor's report and 
opinion, were forwarded by the Council to the Conference with 
its comments (subparagraph 17.2 of EC-34/5, dated 26 
September 2003), in accordance with Financial Regulation 
13.10. 
 
¶34.  (U)  The Conference noted the report of the Office of 
Internal Oversight (OIO) for the period from 1 January to 31 
December 2002, and the accompanying note by the 
Director-General (EC-34/DG.4, dated 17 June 2003; Corr.1, 
dated 18 August 2003; and Corr.2 dated 19 September 2003) 
transmitted to the Conference by the 34th Executive Council 
Session.  The Conference also noted the comments of the 
Council at its 34th Session on the work carried out by the 
OIO (paragraph 16 of EC-34/5, dated 26 September 2003).  The 
Brazilian Delegation specifically requested to note the 
comments of the 34th Session on the work carried out by the 
OIO.  The Brazilian Delegation also requested an additional 
sentence to the Conference Report be added that mandated that 
the Conference "review the matter of recruitment and 
appointments."  Ambassador Javits objected to the Brazilian 
proposal, stressing that there had been no such agreement by 
the Conference.  Canada spoke in support of Ambassador 
Javits, and the Brazilian request was 
not adopted. 
 
¶35.  (U)  The Conference approved the amendments to the 
Financial Regulations that the DG had submitted to it through 
the Council (C-8/DEC/CRP.10 dated 16 October 2003). 
 
¶36.  (U)  The Conference noted the Note by the DG on the use 
of the Working Capital Fund, which the Council had forwarded 
to it (EC-34/DG.12, dated 12 September 2003). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
AGENDA ITEM TWELVE - ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE 
COUNCIL 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶37.  (U) CSP-8 elected the following States Parties to the 
Executive Council to serve a term of two years commencing on 
12 May 2004: 
 
African Group: 
Algeria, Kenya, Morocco, South Africa 
 
Asian Group: 
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Malaysia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka 
 
Eastern European Group: 
Russian Federation, Serbia and Montenegro, Ukraine 
 
Latin American Group and the Caribbean: 
Cuba, Panama, Peru, Uruguay 
 
Western European and Others Group: 
Greece, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
AGENDA ITEM THIRTEEN - PROGRAMME AND BUDGET OF THE OPCW 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶38.  (U)  The Conference did not agree to the DG's proposal 
to increase the number of Article VI inspections 
(EC-34/DG.11, dated September 4, 2003), from 132 to 150, to 
be conducted in 2003 resulting from cost-savings achieved by 
the Technical Secretariat's optimization and efficiency 
efforts.  Consensus on this issue was blocked by the Germans, 
who are concerned that such an increase would set a precedent 
for the Technical Secretariat to conduct activities at levels 
exceeding the negotiated program of work.  It emerged, during 
the course of discussion, that after the EC had told the DG 
not to proceed with these inspections and forwarded the issue 
to the CSP for consideration, six additional inspections 
above the approved level were conducted. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
AGENDA ITEM FOURTEEN - SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶39.  (U)  After a substantial amount of last-minute 
confusion, the Conference adopted the use of the forthcoming 
2004 UN scale of assessments modified for differences in 
membership, as the basis for the OPCW 2004 scale.  The U.S. 
delegation appreciated the expert advice on scale issues 
provided by IO/S on short notice. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
AGENDA ITEM FIFTEEN - FOSTERING OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶40. (U) The facilitator (Suarez/Mexico) reported orally to 
the EC that there is not yet agreement on what proposal 
should be submitted to the Conference, as requested at CSP-7. 
 As such, the item was not raised at CSP-8.  The Conference 
noted the statements by Iran, India and Pakistan on this 
matter, and referred this issue to the Council for its 
further consideration, with a view to the Council forwarding 
a proposal at CSP-9 for consideration and approval. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
AGENDA ITEM SIXTEEN - AGREEMENTS ON THE PRIVILEGES AND 
IMMUNITIES OF THE OPCW 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶41.  (U)  The Conference adopted the decision on the draft 
agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the OPCW on the 
privileges and immunities of the OPCW (C-8/DEC/CRP.1, dated 
25 September 2003). 
 
¶42.  (U)  The Conference adopted the decision on the draft 
agreement between the Republic of Burundi and the OPCW on the 
privileges and immunities of the OPCW (C-8/DEC/CRP.2, dated 
25 September 2003). 
 
¶43.  (U)  The Conference adopted the decision on the draft 
agreement between the Republic of Cyprus and the OPCW on the 
privileges and immunities of the OPCW (C-8/DEC/CRP.3, dated 
25 September 2003). 
 
¶44.  (U)  The Conference adopted the draft decision on the 
draft agreement between the Slovak Republic and the OPCW on 
the privileges and immunities of the OPCW (C-8/DEC/CRP.4, 
dated 25 September 2003). 
 
¶45.  (U)  The Conference considered and adopted the decision 
on privileges and immunities agreements between the OPCW and 
States Parties (C-8/DEC/CRP.5, dated 7 October 2003). 
 
¶46.  (U)  The U.S. delegation made a statement from the floor 
noting that these agreements, like others previously adopted, 
go well beyond  the status, privileges, and immunities 
required by the Convention and well beyond what the U.S. 
would be prepared to accept in its own bilateral agreement 
with the OPCW. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
AGENDA ITEM SEVENTEEN - ENSURING THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE 
CONVENTION 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶47.  (U)  The Conference noted the report by the DG on the 
implementation of the recommendation of CSP-7 on ensuring the 
universality of the Convention (C-8/DG.4, dated 1 August 
2003). 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
AGENDA ITEM EIGHTEEN - REPORTS OF SUBSIDIARY BODIES 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶48.  (U)  Conference action under the heading "Reports of 
Subsidiary Bodies" was handled in perfunctory fashion.  The 
Conference adopted the Report of the Credentials Committee 
noting that representatives from 116 States Parties and 
states participating on a provisional basis were represented 
at the Conference.  Other subsidiary bodies were not called 
upon to report. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
AGENDA ITEM NINETEEN - ANY OTHER BUSINESS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶49.  (U)  See Bustani discussion in paragraphs 12 and 13. 
 
¶50.  (U)  In General Committee ("Bureau") discussions, the 
U.S. made the point that it might be more advantageous for 
each CSP to elect the officers for the subsequent CSP, 
particularly the Chairman.  The U.S. provided the text of the 
proposed amendment of Rule 34 for consideration. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY - DATE AND DURATION OF THE NEXT REGULAR 
SESSION OF THE CSP 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶51.  (U)  The Conference decided to hold its ninth session 
from November 29 to December 3 or, if facilities were 
unavailable for that week, for the period December 6-10. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-ONE - ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE CSP 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶52.  (U)  The report was adopted by the Conference. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS WITH TS ON OPTIMIZING VERIFICATION 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶53. (U)  The U.S. met with a team of approximately ten 
Technical Secretariat Verification and Inspectorate 
Directorate personnel (headed by Dr. Reeps, Director of 
Verification) to discuss specific questions regarding the 
TS's and U.S.'s concept for verification.  Both sides were 
 
SIPDIS 
encouraged with the fact that, conceptually, our ideas on 
what is required for verification are closely aligned, and 
both concepts provided a good opportunity to reduce existing 
TS inspector manpower levels at operating U.S. CW destruction 
 
SIPDIS 
facilities. 
 
¶54. (U) It was agreed that we must take a "systems approach" 
to verification with the goal of better understanding the 
inter-relationship between verification activities at 
chemical weapon storage facilities and chemical weapon 
destruction facilities.  From this understanding we are 
confident that we can identify and focus on activities (or 
reference points) that are absolutely essential for 
verification. 
 
¶55. (U) Aside from general questions presented to the TS on 
their concept paper, del emphasized the following points with 
regard to the evaluation criteria we would apply in 
determining the suitability of the concepts being considered; 
1) maintaining effective verification of other States 
Parties; 2) ensuring the concept does not disrupt CW 
destruction operations; 3) any quantitative measurements 
decided upon must not lead to potential CWDF compliance 
issues; 4) final verification system determinations will be 
made on a facility-by-facility basis and; 5) establishment of 
an effective and efficient verification process, not simply 
the notion of an "across-the-board" manpower reduction of 
plus-or-minus 30%.  The TS proposed that the next near-term 
steps include an "expert" workshop to work through questions 
on the specific elements of each other's verification 
proposals, and a site visit or visits to a U.S. facility or 
facilities to develop verification system concept case 
studies. 
 
¶56.  (U)  Javits sends. 
SOBEL