This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
U.S. irritated over Turkish demands for immediate money - 
Hurriyet 
NYT warns Bush: Iraq war a catastrophe without Turkey - 
Turkiye 
Bush, Erdogan poker - Vatan 
Turkey will pay dearly again in second U.S. Gulf War venture 
-Aksam 
Ankara warns Barzani to stay away from Kirkuk - Milliyet 
Erdogan asks U.S. guarantees for Turkomen - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Bargaining with U.S. locked - Radikal 
Turkey's Second Army in northern Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Gul: Turkey cannot prevent war alone -- Yeni Safak 
TUSIAD praises government's peace efforts - Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Central Bank: Short-term  war won't bring lasting pressure 
on economy - Dunya 
U.S. wants IMF to control $3 billion grant - Finansal Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: AKP leader Erdogan responded to President Bush's call 
for a decision about deployment of U.S. troops in Turkey by 
saying that the issue would be taken to the parliament 
Tuesday, dailies report.  Papers comment that U.S. has the 
IMF `trump card' in hand against Turkey.  U.S. might go 
further and bar Turks from entering northern Iraq, and 
cooperate with the Kurds in the region, papers say.  U.S. 
might also withdraw support from Turkey on crucial issues 
like the EU, Cyprus, and Armenian genocide, papers indicate. 
However, closing of northern front will claim more money and 
lives on the U.S. side, comments note.  U.S. cannot afford 
to break the U.S., Israel, Turkey triangle or let Turkey 
join the Germany, France axis in Europe, papers add. 
"Hurriyet" says the visiting U.S. House of Representatives 
delegation did not attend a scheduled meeting with Turks at 
the MFA on Thursday as a reaction to Turkey's demands for 
more economic aid.  Prime Minister Gul is expected to make a 
statement about Turkey's position after talks with the 
Americans today.  Observers expect the parliament to approve 
soon deployment of U.S. troops in Turkey. Papers agree that 
the U.S. has presented an ultimatum to Turkey, but then 
chose to tone down.  "Hurriyet" quotes a `senior AKP 
official' as saying Turkey could not wait for the 
Congressional approval of aid, and that the money should be 
transferred to Turkey via private banks.  "Aksam" claims 
that in talks, the U.S. was putting the emphasis on the 
status of U.S. troops to be deployed in Turkey, exemption of 
troops from VAT, and the cost of ID cards for American 
soldiers.  Meanwhile, following reports about Iran deploying 
5,000 special troops in northern Iraq, Turkey sent 7,000 
soldiers to control strategic points in the region, 
"Cumhuriyet" reports. 
 
 
Cyprus: Turkish Cypriot leader Denktas strongly criticized 
the UN Cyprus envoy De Soto for presenting the third Annan 
plan to Ankara before submitting it to the Turkish Cypriots, 
say papers.  Denktas said the revised plan has increased the 
number of Greek Cypriots to be settled in the Turkish sector 
to 85,000 from the previous 60,000.  Under the new plan, 
Turkish Cypriots will be given the status of `protected 
minority,' Denktas reportedly said.  U.S. Special Cyprus 
Coordinator Tom Weston is expected in Ankara over the 
weekend before proceeding to the island next week, papers 
say. 
 
 
Erdogan eligible to run in by-elections:  High Election 
Board (YSK) has rejected objections to AKP leader Erdogan's 
participation in Siirt by-elections on March 9, and 
announced that Erdogan was eligible to run for parliament. 
Siirt elections might clear the path for Erdogan to the post 
of the Prime Minister. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Standoff with Iraq 
 
 
"Ankara's stance" 
Murat Yetkin noted in liberal-intellectual Radikal (2/21): 
"Ankara refrains from giving an image as if declaring a war 
to its neighbor in the absence of a UNSC resolution.  The 
Turkish decision experiences delay also due to both NATO and 
the EU's failure to reach a unanimous stance on the Iraq 
issue.  On the other hand, keeping up the good relations 
with the US is a major concern for Ankara.  Turkey does not 
want to see bilateral relations get hurt.  It looks like 
there is a formula to be applied in order to break the 
current deadlock.  The government might prepare the 
authorization request for the movement of US troops in 
Turkey, and send it to the parliament.  Due to the 
parliamentary calendar, the Parliament will reconvene on the 
25th, which practically provides an extra four days for both 
the ongoing negotiations between Turkey and the US and the 
ongoing efforts for a peaceful settlement with Iraq.  As it 
seems, Washington is not going to decline such a formula." 
 
 
"If Turkey says `yes'" 
Sami Kohen wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (2/21): "Regardless 
of whether Turkey stays in or out, the war will present 
Turkey with a series of serious economic losses. 
Cooperation with the US is the only way to be able to 
compensate the loss to a certain degree.  In the case of a 
`no' answer, Turkey will have to deal with this issue alone. 
What the government is doing right now is actually a neck-to- 
neck bargaining to provide the best possible compensation 
plan for Turkey. . Yet it is very important not to be 
eccentric or excessive with the demands and not to push the 
other side's limits of tolerance.  Despite some tactical 
mistakes along the way, Ankara pursued a good negotiation 
process with the US on military, political and economic 
issues.  . Once Turkey comes up with a clear `yes' answer, 
it will also help Turkey for the implementation of a policy 
on northern Iraq and the whole Iraq based on Turkey's 
interests and security concerns. . To be able to have an 
active say in the regional reshaping, Turkey should be able 
to act under the requirements of its geo-strategic 
importance." 
 
 
PEARSON