This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001516 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/07/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER NP
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH ONE OF NEPAL'S MOST SENIOR DEMOCRATS: 
 AN UNLIKELY PRIME MINISTERIAL CANDIDATE 
 
REF: A. KATHMANDU 1486 
     ¶B. KATHMANDU 1507 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for Reasons 1.5 (b) and 
 (d) 
 
Summary 
======== 
 
¶1.  (C) On August 7, the Ambassador met with Krishna Prasad 
Bhattarai, a founding father of Nepal's democracy, and 
Narayan Khadga, a former Vice Chairman of the National 
Planning Commission, to discuss the internal dynamics of the 
Nepali Congress Party, Bhattarai's recent discussions with 
the King, and the prospects for Bhattarai serving as a 
consensus prime minister.  While Bhattarai is in good 
physical condition for his age and an excellent commentator 
on Nepali politics, he did not look strong enough for the 
rigors of public office.  End summary. 
 
A Meeting with One of Nepal's Oldest Democrats 
============================================= == 
 
¶2.  (C) On August 7, the Ambassador met with long-time 
friend, former Prime Minister, and co-founder of the Nepali 
Congress Party, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai.  Accompanying 
Bhattarai was former Vice Chairman of the National Planning 
Commission, Narayan Khadga.  (Note:  Both are members of the 
Nepali Congress (NC) Party and have sided with the faction 
headed by former Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba.  End 
note.)  Bhattarai was imprisoned from 1961 to 1971 for his 
democratic activism and now at age 79 lives in retirement on 
the outskirts of Kathmandu.  Always outspoken and a hero of 
Nepal's democratic movement, he provided the Ambassador with 
his views on Nepal's acrimonious politics and recent press 
reports that Bhattarai may emerge as a consensus prime 
ministerial candidate. 
 
Dialogue with the King 
======================= 
 
¶3.  (C)  Three weeks ago, Bhattarai met with King Gyanendra 
to discuss with him the impasse between the political parties 
and the government.  At the meeting, the King affirmed his 
commitment to democracy but admitted deep concern over the 
current political stalemate.  Bhattarai told the King that 
whereas in the past Nepalese Kings could be firm, direct 
monarchical involvement in politics was no longer risk-free. 
Bhattarai warned the King that if he continues to ignore the 
parties, the parties may attack the Palace.  In their 
discussion of the Maoists, Bhattarai reported the King to say 
that they must be suppressed.  Bhattarai called the exchange 
frank, describing the King as a gentleman, who continues to 
deserve the respect of the Nepalese people. 
 
Views on Party Rival Koirala 
============================= 
 
¶4.  (C) When the Ambassador pressed Bhattarai for his opinion 
on the NC's next steps, he stated that the King must return 
what was taken.  (Note:  On October 4, the King dismissed 
elected Prime Minister Deuba.  End note.)  Should the King 
call an election, the NC will participate, Bhattarai said he 
believes the King may enjoy the tensions among the parties 
and the split in the NC.  Bhattarai does not foresee a 
reunion of the two NC factions, blaming NC General Secretary 
Girija Prasad Koirala for undermining party unity.  Bhattarai 
describes Koirala as unreliable and dishonest, with little 
popular support.  Bhattarai also reported that a 
representative from the Indian Embassy (likely Ambassador 
Shyam Saran) had visited him, at which time the Indian was 
very critical of Koirala and his unwillingness to join the 
current government.  Bhattarai observed that Koirala's stand 
was a break from his past practice, which was to do whatever 
the Indians requested of him.  Narayan Khadga took up where 
Bhattarai left off, calling Koirala a fool for his ridiculous 
public statements.  Bhattarai offered that the best sacrifice 
Koirala could make for the party was to leave it. 
 
A Consensus Prime Minister? 
============================ 
 
¶5.  (C)  When the Ambassador asked Bhattarai about the press 
reports naming him as a consensus prime minister; the aged 
and enfeebled gentleman chuckled and replied that he had no 
interest in the job.  He went on to say, however, that if he 
was called, he might be able to galvanize party support and 
would work towards elections in a year or two. 
 
Comment 
======== 
 
¶6.  (C)  Bhattarai and Khadga were engaging and very critical 
of their NC party rival, Koirala.  Despite some optimism in 
the press that a "father of Nepal's democracy" could reemerge 
in Nepal's time of need, Bhattarai appeared too enfeebled to 
be anything more than a figurehead.  He required reminders of 
conversations that took place a week ago and referred to his 
diary to recollect details.  His physical condition did not 
look strong enough for the rigors of public office. 
MALINOWSKI