This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR - GILROY, AND WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD TD CA FTAA
SUBJECT: TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO SOLICITS FTAA SECRETARIAT 
 
The High Commission of Trinidad and Tobago in Ottawa has sent 
us a diplomatic note announcing its government's interest in 
hosting the FTAA secretariat and reqeusting USG support. 
Please advise if and how we should respond to the High 
Commission. 
 
 
Begin text: 
 
High Commission of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago 
 
NOTE NO: 52/03 
 
     The High Commission of the Republic of Trinidad and 
Tobago presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United 
States of America and has the honour to inform the latter 
that the Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago 
has announced its interest in hosting the Permanent 
Headquarters of the Secretariat of the Free Trade Area of the 
Americas (FTAA). 
 
     Situated midway between North and South America, 
Trinidad and Tobago's strategic position at the convergence 
of the Caribbean, South and Central America, makes the 
country an ideal location for the FTAA Secretariat.  Trinidad 
and Tobago also boasts a socially and culturally diverse 
society complemented by a stable democracy, a safe and secure 
environment, modern infrastructure and a dynamic business 
climate. 
 
     Trinidad and Tobago maintains one of the highest 
standards of living in the region.  The low cost of 
utilities, transportation, food and leisure combine to make 
executive living standards highly competitive when compared 
with other major metropolitan centers within the hemisphere. 
 
     The Trinidad and Tobago bid has been endorsed by all 
member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). 
 
     The High Commission of the Republic of Trinidad and 
Tobago wishes to request the valuable support of the 
Government of the United States of America in its bid to host 
the Permanent Headquarters of the Secretariat of the FTAA. 
 
     The High Commission of the Republic of Trinidad and 
Tobago avails itself of thsi opportunity to renew to the 
Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its 
highest consideration. 
 
OTTAWA 
2 June 2003 
 
End text. 
CELLUCCI