This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 002462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM OVIP IZ VM
SUBJECT:  CPV EXTERNAL RELATIONS CHIEF MEETS AMBASSADOR 
 
Ref: A.  02 Hanoi 1022    B. Hanoi 1805 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary: The CPV's top foreign affairs official told 
the Ambassador he wants better relations and "understanding" 
with the U.S., and that Vietnam would continue dialogue with 
the U.S. on human rights and "democracy."  He also said 
Vietnam would participate in the rebuilding of Iraq 
"according to its capability and tradition" and that Vietnam 
was focused on improving its legal system.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Ambassador, accompanied by poloff, met on September 
23 with Nguyen Van Son, Chairman of the Commission for 
External Relations of the Central Committee of the Communist 
Party of Vietnam.  (Ref a reported on Ambassador's 
introductory call.)  Son was joined by Pham Tien Nhien, 
Director of the Commission's Europe and Americas Department 
and by Bui The Giang, Director of the Commission's People-to- 
People Committee.  [Note: Giang will be the senior 
representative of the CPV in Vietnam's delegation to the 
Conference on U.S.-Vietnam relations in Washington next 
week.  End note.] 
 
Bilateral relations:  good news. . . 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Ambassador reviewed recent positive developments in 
the U.S.-Vietnam relationship, including upcoming high-level 
visits, and noted that since strategic decisions in Vietnam 
are by definition the decisions of the Party, Son's insights 
into the SRV's thinking would be valuable to the USG. 
Ambassador noted that Vietnam's continued integration into 
the world economy was critical to its success, and that 
Vietnam had clearly made a decision to improve its relations 
with other countries, including the U.S.  Son agreed that 
Vietnam attached great importance to its relationship with 
the U.S., expressed satisfaction at the Ambassador's 
positive evaluation of new developments, and wished him a 
safe trip when he accompanied Foreign Minister Nien to 
Washington at the end of the month. 
 
¶4. (U) Ambassador recommended to Son that CPV leaders also 
visit the U.S. in order to see the U.S. system and meet 
American people.  The roles of various pressure groups in 
the United States, he said, were poorly understood in 
Vietnam, and CPV leaders could profit from seeing and 
meeting with businesses, labor unions, ethnic groups, and 
professional associations.  Ambassador recognized that the 
Commission's role was advisory, but stressed that visiting 
the USG and meeting with Congress and interest groups would 
provide a greater understanding of what really goes on in 
the United States and improve the quality of the 
Commission's recommendations.  In particular, he added, 
young people with bright futures should have the chance to 
go to the U.S. to broaden their contacts and understanding. 
Ambassador urged also that CPV officials meet with visiting 
U.S. groups in order to make the CPV seem less mysterious. 
Son thanked the Ambassador for his ideas and suggestions and 
pledged to respond as soon as possible. 
 
. . . and bad news 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) Ambassador warned that human rights and religious 
freedom issues "hang over the relationship like a dark 
cloud."  He observed that while both sides were working to 
move the relationship forward, lack of progress in those 
areas slowed progress.  Son said he thought the conflicts 
over human rights and religious freedom were in part due to 
a lack of mutual understanding, and expressed hope that the 
Ambassador would help others in the U.S. understand Vietnam 
more clearly.  In Son's opinion, there should be more 
regular contact between the Embassy and "us."  [Note: It was 
ambiguous whether Son meant with the CPV, the Commission, or 
the Central Committee.  End note]  Son claimed that Vietnam 
wanted to continue the dialogue on human rights and 
"democracy" and expressed a hope that, through the 
Ambassador, the American people could understand Vietnam 
better and build mutual trust. 
 
¶6. (U) Ambassador noted that the key to increasing mutual 
awareness was interaction in different spheres, including 
cultural and educational exchanges.  The U.S. had been 
trying to increase those activities, but had run into some 
problems with provincial authorities, most recently during 
the Jazz Ambassadors' tour, he said.  Son admitted that the 
provinces sometimes "didn't get the message," and that 
blocking the performance of a music group did not make 
sense. 
 
¶7. (U) Both the Ambassador and Son lamented the public 
comment in each other's press.  Ambassador stated that it 
seemed that the editorials in the Vietnamese press, while 
still harsh, had gotten somewhat better.  Son likewise 
complained about editorials in the U.S. press, adding that 
American papers published "hurtful things" that he did not 
care to repeat. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Ambassador also expressed regret that bilateral 
cooperation in certain areas -- particularly law enforcement 
-- was still very slow; the result was a reduction in the 
effectiveness of U.S. and Vietnamese agencies.  Son 
acknowledged Ambassador's concerns but did not offer a 
response. 
 
International and other issues 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (U) When asked about the most recent Party plenum on 
national security strategy in June (ref b), Son claimed that 
there had been no discussion of Iraq.  He stated that 
Vietnam had "its own attitude" about Iraq, and did not 
follow any other country's lead.  Son emphasized that 
Vietnam was nonetheless prepared to participate in the 
effort to help Iraq and would "work in line with Vietnam's 
abilities and traditions."  Son added that this attitude was 
"intended to be cooperative and positive" and that Vietnam's 
international activities were designed to "further 
international relations and forge a proactive effort to 
achieve Vietnam's needs and accelerate national economic 
development."  Considering Vietnam's particular expertise, 
Ambassador suggested that Vietnam explore an international 
peacekeeping role, perhaps with a focus on demining. 
 
¶10. (U) Son reminded Ambassador that he was also a delegate 
to the National Assembly and that Vietnam needed a better, 
more complete legal system, which would ensure equality on 
many fronts.  He lamented the slow pace of reform in the 
Vietnamese system, admitting that the GVN was "slow to 
learn" from other governments but was highly concerned with 
both quality and popular opinion in drafting and passing new 
legislation. 
 
 
¶11.  (U)  Comment:  Our efforts to elevate the substance of 
strategic dialogue with the CPV's top foreign policy expert 
were not notably successful.  Son appeared to be unwilling 
to deviate from predictable -- if generally positive -- 
lines.  However, the Commission's staff has been quietly 
helpful in recent months in arranging meetings for 
Ambassador with General Secretary Nong Duc Manh and 
Politburo member Tran Dinh Hoan, as well as other meetings 
with various CPV Commissions for Pol/C, further indicating a 
renewed willingness to engage in dialogue and expand 
contacts.  It will nonetheless likely take years of 
increased dialogue before we reach the level of strategic 
interchange more common with our other Asian diplomatic 
partners. 
BURGHARDT