This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON ETRD CA
SUBJECT: CANADA: WI-FI SURVEY RESULTS 
 
REFTEL: STATE 85946 
 
WE SOLICITED RESPONSES TO THE REFTEL SURVEY FROM INDUSTRY 
CANADA'S DIRECTOR FOR SPECTRUM AND RADIO POLICY FERNAND 
LEGER.  THE RESPONSES ARE LETTERED ACCORDING TO THE 
QUESTIONS LISTED IN REFTEL: 
 
A) Canada has designated several bands for license-exempt 
operations including those currently of interest to Wi- 
Fi\802.11 b\a\g standards and similar wireless 
communication products (i.e. the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz.) 
 
The band 2400-2483.5 MHz is available for a wide variety 
of license-exempt applications and products including Wi- 
Fi (802.11b standard) and higher power point-to-point 
communications systems using directional antennas.  The 
Industry Canada (IC) rules for 2.4 GHz 
(strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/sf01918e.html) and 5 GHz 
(strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/sf01915e.html) spectrum 
designations align with the FCC Part 15 Rules. 
 
In Canada the designations for wireless LANS are: 
--band 5150-5250 MHz - lower (relatively) power devices 
to operate indoors (200 mW eirp max) 
--band 5250-5350 MHZ - medium power, outdoor operation is 
allowed (250 mW tx pwr, 1W eirp/11 dBm/MHz) 
--band 5725-5825 MHz - higher power, outdoor operation is 
allowed (1 W tx pwr, 4W eirp/17 dBm/MHz) 
--band 5725-5850 MHZ - devices are allowed to operate 
point-to-point with directional antennas.  This band is 
also designated for a range of lower power license-exempt 
devices.  The technical rules for operation and 
certification of equipment are detailed in the Canadian 
Radio Standard Specifications (RSS) 210 
(strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/sf01320e.html) 
 
General information on the Government of Canada's (GOC) 
spectrum policies can be found at: 
//strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrksv/spectrum/engdoc /spect1.html 
?icservices=e._ 
 
B) License-exempt operation of equipment certified as Wi- 
Fi (802.11) is permitted in bands designated in the 2.4 
GHz and 5 GHz ranges. 
 
C) Commercial applications of Wi-Fi systems are permitted 
and encouraged.  License-exempt devices may constitute 
transmission facilities to provide public 
telecommunications services as defined in the Canadian 
Telecommunications Act.  Operators of license-exempt 
transmission links may need to seek approval for antennas 
and tower structures, and follow Industry Canada's 
procedures for use of radio spectrum. 
 
D) With the phenomenal uptake of Wi-Fi products to access 
high-speed Internet by consumer and business users, a 
number of traditional wireline and wireless carriers, new 
service providers and ISPs offering high-speed Internet 
have accelerated market trials for both Wi-Fi public 
hotspots and use of Wi-Fi for providing high-speed 
Internet access in urban areas.  Interest in providing 
high-speed Internet service using Wi-Fi technology is 
also emerging in rural areas and sub-urban areas, where 
the potential of interference is relatively low. 
 
E and F) Private service providers are becoming 
increasingly interested in using Wi-Fi products with more 
directive antennas that provide longer reach to customers 
in rural communities and surrounding areas.  A number of 
rural communities have access to high speed Internet 
using a range of technologies including license-exempt 
products such as Wi-Fi access. Wi-Fi is used in schools, 
libraries, and health centers and governments offices in 
rural communities.  Information on Canadian wireless 
ISP's can be found at: 
www.onelasvegas.com/wireless/wireless_ISP_Can ada.html 
 
Fixed wireless access technology, of all kinds, is an 
important element of the GOC objective to enable the 
development of a range of broadband Internet access 
technologies to provide for under-served rural 
communities.  Industry Canada has a Broadband Pilot 
Program (www.broadband.gc.ca/index_e.asp.) aimed at 
encouraging the development of broadband services in a 
number of rural and remote communities that are currently 
not served by high-speed Internet.  Several rural 
communities have been provided financing to carry out 
business studies and seek requests for proposals to 
establish the cost of transport systems (where required) 
and local broadband access facilities using a mixture of 
wireline\wireless technologies, including fibre optics, 
digital microwave systems and satellite transmission.  In 
the next phase of the program the communities will 
present business and technical plans as part of their 
applications to Industry Canada for financial assistance 
to implement broadband service. Industry Canada 
anticipates that some of these applications will use 
wireline\wireless facilities. This will include licensed 
and license-exempt local distribution facilities, 
including Wi-Fi technology. 
 
CELLUCCI#