This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007279 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2013 
TAGS: MARR AF TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY TO CONSIDER HELO CONTRIBUTION TO ISAF 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 317086 
     ¶B. ANKARA 6734 
 
 
(U) Classified by Charge d'Affaires Robert Deutsch, reasons 
1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) PolMilOff delivered reftel demarche requesting 
additional helos to meet NATO's SOR for ISAF to MFA South 
Asia Head of Department Ergin Soner November 18.  Soner noted 
the requirements, agreeing that meeting the SOR in order to 
go to the next stage of expanding ISAF outside Kabul and 
supporting the PRTs was very important.  He promised to pass 
the request to TGS, which he speculated would positively 
consider the request.  PolMilOff also delivered the points to 
TGS/J-3 CPT (Navy) Sinan Sinani, who said it was the first he 
had heard of the issue.  Sinani declined to speculate on 
whether TGS would be inclined to support the request. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Comment: We understand that GEN Myers raised the 
issue with TGS Chief GEN Ozkok in Brussels recently and that 
Ozkok was noncommittal.  MFA NATO DDG Sanivar Kizildeli said 
recently (ref B) the GOT would like to contribute more to 
PKOs in general and is trying to reform the GOT's onerous 
legislative requirements to give the GOT more flexibility in 
doing so.  Perhaps with no imminent plan to deploy its forces 
to Iraq, Ankara will be willing to ante up for Afghanistan. 
EDELMAN