This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL EAGR GM
SUBJECT: Berninger/Hesse Greens Move Towards USG, CDU 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Matthias Berninger, State Secretary in the 
national Agriculture Ministry and new head of the Green 
party in Hesse, wants to help repair US-German relations 
and could make helpful gestures on Iraq.  A rising star and 
protege of FM Fischer, Berninger wants to free the party 
from its dependence on Social Democrats (SPD) and 
strengthen ties to moderate Christian Democrats (CDU).  On 
agriculture, Berninger sees development aid as key to 
reviving stalled WTO talks.  Berninger argues against 
expanding Frankfurt airport and says expansion may be 
delayed until 2008.  The Greens are searching for new 
policies to address Germany's low birthrate and aging 
society without bankrupting the state.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Can Greens Make Positive Gesture on Iraq? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a discussion with CG, Hesse Greens leader / 
federal State Secretary for Agriculture and Consumer 
Protection Matthias Berninger said that the Greens could 
support German participation in the Iraq mission even 
though the party staunchly opposed the war.  "Fischer is 
preparing the party for things to come" (greater 
cooperation on Iraq).  Berninger asked what the party and 
the German government could do to support US soldiers 
deployed from Germany to the Middle East and agreed to 
arrange a visit to the U.S. military hospital in Landstuhl 
by a leading member of the national Greens.  Post offered 
to facilitate a U.S. military briefing for Greens party 
leaders. 
 
Conservative-Green Coalitions Become More Fashionable 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶3. (U) Berninger said he wants to free the Greens from the 
"Babylonian captivity" of the SPD who treat the Greens as a 
junior partner.  Relations with the SPD are tense at best, 
and Hesse Greens are forging more local coalitions with the 
CDU (most recently in Kassel / northern Hesse). 
Northrhine-Westphalia also has important CDU-Green 
coalitions, including Cologne. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Greens are open to working with the CDU in 
state governments, but Berninger ruled out partnering with 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU):  "Koch does not 
represent the enlightened CDU with whom we want to 
cooperate," adding that Koch's arrogance and ambition are a 
matter of concern within the CDU.  He noted that members of 
the CDU national presidium contacted Hesse Greens seeking 
ammunition against Koch.  In his estimation, Koch's 
mishandling of the Hesse budget will make it hard for him 
to become a credible player on the national scene, with 
Standard and Poor downgrading Hesse -- Germany's leading 
financial center -- while neighboring states preserve their 
AAA rating. 
 
Redirecting Farm Aid from Rich Countries to Poor 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Berninger, also the number two in the federal 
MinAg, blamed NGO's for the collapse of WTO talks in 
Cancun, a fiasco which will hurt developing nations since 
the WTO is the only organization that can solve 
agricultural trade problems.  Berninger believes wealthy 
countries should redirect aid from domestic farmers to 
poorer countries and supports British Treasury Secretary 
Gordon Brown's proposal to create a development fund for 
rural areas in developing countries.  Berninger agrees with 
the USG position that only democracy and trade can bring 
development in the long run. 
 
Reversing Germany's Demographic and Economic Slide 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Greens are searching for ways to reverse 
Germany's demographic and economic decline without 
bankrupting the state.  An unfavorable labor market, low 
birthrate, and aging society are Germany's greatest 
challenges at the moment.  "Even today Germany does not 
have enough doctors or engineers ... with the birthrate 
declining even further, Germany runs the danger of losing 
out to France and Scandinavia who have a successful 
demographic policy."  The Greens call for better childcare, 
more aid for mothers, and other child-friendly policies. 
On Agenda 2010, Berninger said eliminating one holiday for 
all Germans would do more to reduce labor cost than many of 
the social reforms the Schroeder government is proposing. 
Berninger defended the Greens' record on controlling public 
expenditures and complained that both SPD and CDU tend to 
spend beyond their means. 
 
Frankfurt Airport Expansion May Be Delayed Until 2008 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Berninger complained that local authorities did 
not seriously explore alternatives to expanding Frankfurt 
Airport, warning that legal obstacles could delay expansion 
until at least 2008.  The airport cannot expand 
indefinitely;  building an additional runway will only buy 
another decade of growth.  Berninger favors a high-speed 
rail or Transrapid connection between Frankfurt and Hahn 
(located 90 kms from Frankfurt).  NOTE: The Hesse Greens 
fared well in state elections this year in part by opposing 
expansion of Frankfurt Airport.  END NOTE. 
 
COMMENT: Building Bridges to Moderate Greens 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) State Secretary Berninger met the CG in the same 
week that the Greens went into coalition with CDU in Kassel 
(second largest city in Hesse).  In Hesse elections earlier 
this year, Greens expanded their vote share at the expense 
of the SPD.  Voter disenchantment with SPD in SW Germany 
could accelerate this trend of CDU-Green rapprochement. 
Berninger (37) represents the party's pragmatic younger 
generation that will follow the Fischer generation. 
Berninger is a fast riser and wants to steer a more 
independent course from the SPD while drawing a line 
against Roland Koch.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE