This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
LONDON FOR POL/RIEDEL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 3-11-13 
TAGS: PTER PHUM PREL MOPS CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  SRI LANKA NAVY SINKS LTTE SHIP; MOST OBSERVERS 
THINK PEACE TALKS WILL CONTINUE 
 
Ref:  (A) Colombo 397 
-     (B) Reston VA DTG 100659Z 
-     (C) Reston VA DTG 102358Z 
 
(U) Classified by Lewis Amselem, Deputy Chief of 
Mission.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  After a reported exchange of fire on 
March 10, the Sri Lanka Navy sunk a cargo ship, that the 
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) claimed was one 
of its merchant ships.  While the monitoring mission 
investigates the incident, the Norwegian Embassy and 
others have expressed concerns about the effect of the 
incident on the peace talks.  Despite the concerns, most 
observers believe that talks will continue.  End Summary 
 
Conflicting GSL and LTTE reports on incident 
============================================ 
 
¶2. (C) According to Sri Lanka Navy reports (detailed in 
Ref A), the navy intercepted a LTTE arms supply ship 
approximately 180 nautical miles (207 miles) off the 
coast of Mullativu (on the north eastern coast of Sri 
Lanka).  The navy then reports that after it ordered the 
ship to stop, the cargo ship's crewmembers opened fire. 
In defending itself, the naval ship returned fire and 
sunk the LTTE vessel. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The "TamilNet" website, believed to be 
controlled by the LTTE, reports that the Sri Lanka Navy 
attacked a LTTE merchant vessel 220 nautical miles 
(about 250 miles) off the eastern coast.  It also 
reports that LTTE political wing leader Thamilchelvan 
sent a letter to the Minister of Defense condemning the 
sinking of the ship.  The report added that 
Thamilchelvan stated that the "grave incident will have 
far reaching implications for the peace process."  The 
LTTE accuses the Sri Lanka Navy of being involved in 
several deliberate and provocative attacks against the 
LTTE in violation of the ceasefire agreement. 
 
SLMM and others express concern 
=============================== 
 
¶4. (C) When questioned, the Norwegian led Sri Lanka 
Monitoring Mission (SLMM) spokesman Teitur Torkelson 
commented that the SLMM was still investigating the 
incident and does not expect to make a public statement 
until March 13.  A concern that the SLMM has is that 
initial navy reports place the incident approximately 
240 nautical miles (276 miles) off the coast and in 
international waters, while the navy's final written 
report places the incident at approximately 180 nautical 
miles off the coast.  The shortened distance puts the 
incident within the area that Sri Lanka claims as its 
exclusive economic zone.  Torkelson added that even if 
the incident took place in international waters the navy 
had certain rights in regards to "hot pursuit" or 
"defense" type issues that had to be reviewed.  One of 
the SLMM tasks is to try to determine the precise 
location of the incident. 
 
¶5. (C) Tomas Stangeland, political officer at the 
Norwegian Embassy, expressed concern about the 
repercussions the incident may have on the next round of 
talks.  He stated that although the Norwegians have not 
heard anything from the LTTE as of yet, he expects the 
LTTE will contact them with comments after the SLMM 
releases its report.  Stangeland believes that the 
incident will lead to some recriminations by the LTTE 
against the GSL, but that the sixth round of talks will 
proceed. 
 
¶6. (C) Other observers seem to be of the consensus that, 
although the incident increases tensions, both sides are 
still committed to the peace process.  For example 
Joseph Pararajasingham, a senior Tamil United Liberation 
Front (TULF) MP, commented to the DCM that sinking of 
the ship does increase tensions, but the LTTE is 
concerned with its image in the international community 
and wants to be seen as being fully committed to the 
peace process.  Therefore, the LTTE will continue with 
the talks until forced to defend itself.  Another TULF 
MP V. Anandasangaree told Poloff that incidents such as 
these decrease the confidence that both sides have in 
one another.  He concluded, however, that despite the 
increased mistrust both sides are benefiting from the 
ceasefire and are thus committed to the peace talks. 
Jehan Perera, of the National Peace Council, a well- 
respected local NGO, also believes that the talks will 
continue.  He is concerned, though, that if the series 
of recent incidents continue they will eventually take 
their toll on the negotiations. 
Comment 
======= 
¶7. (C) The sinking of the LTTE ship by the GSL has 
clearly raised tensions between the two sides.  Adding 
to the tensions are some unconfirmed reports that the 
President ordered the navy to sink the LTTE ship -- the 
navy is denying the report.  How the negotiators will 
deal with these tensions in the next round of talks 
remains to be seen.  The only positive outcome is the 
general consensus that the talks will continue.  On a 
separate note, one unusual aspect of the most recent 
incident is the relatively muted response in the Tamil 
community.  After other recent incidents the LTTE 
responded immediately and vociferously with protests, 
hartals (boycotts), and multiple complaints to and about 
the government.  This time Thamilchelvan's letter 
appears to be the principal response, for now.  End 
Comment. 
 
¶8. (U) Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS