This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006214 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR WHITE 
DEPT FOR E, EB/MALAC, AND OES/LEE 
STATE PASS EPA FOR JANDERSON 
STATEPASS FDA FOR RLAKE 
STATE PASS USAID FOR JLEWIS 
USDA FOR FAS FOR OA/SIMMONS ITP/FECITT 
USDA FOR APHIS JTURNER 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR TU
SUBJECT: Turkey's Biotechnology Regime 
REF: SECSTATE 263456 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Not for 
internet distribution. 
 
 
¶1.   This is in response to reftel request. 
 
 
¶2.   (SBU)  Summary: Although Turkey has drafted regulations 
pertaining to biotechnology, they have not been implemented. 
Turkey permits the importation of genetically modified crops 
although it does not permit use of bio-engineered seeds for 
planting.  Most Turkish officials, particularly those on the 
regulatory side, have a poor understanding of biotechnology. 
There is concern that a small number of influential 
officials are spreading misinformation about the safety of 
food and agricultural products developed using biotechnology 
that will ultimately have a negative effect on consumer 
perception and future legislation.  End Summary. 
 
 
----------- 
Legislation 
----------- 
¶3.   (SBU) Biotechnology regulations in Turkey are limited 
to a 1998 directive on field trials, which have since been 
suspended.  It is not clear whether the GOT will develop new 
regulations concerning biotechnology soon. However, 
Turkey's ratification of the Cartagena Biosafety Protocol on 
June 17, 2003 and its need to harmonize its regulations with 
relevant EU directives in preparation for accession talks 
may encourage the development of these regulations. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The "Directive on the Principles of Field Trials 
of Genetically Modified Organisms" was issued by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) in 1998. In 
May 1998, several field trials were carried out at different 
research institutes in the country.  Specific crops tested 
were corn, cotton and potatoes. Subsequently, an interagency 
commission on "biotechnology and biosafety" requested that 
all experiments be discontinued. As a result, there has been 
no additional field testing of biotech crops in Turkey.  At 
the same time, there is no regulation in place that 
regulates or penalizes those who do field testing without 
MARA permission. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) In 2001, two draft directives were prepared, one 
relating to the registration of genetically modified plants, 
the other to the deliberate release of the GMOs into the 
environment and their placement on the market.  While these 
directives never went into effect, they drew heavily if not 
exclusively from EU directives.  We would expect any future 
legislation would also be designed to conform to EU 
directives as well as the Biosafety Protocol 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Despite the potential benefits of producing BT 
corn and cotton in Turkey, it is unlikely to occur in the 
near future.  Monsanto, a large biotech seed developer, has 
abandoned plans to introduce biotech seeds in Turkey, and is 
instead producing and exporting conventional corn seeds 
which it markets to the EU. 
 
 
------------------ 
Trade:  Close Call 
------------------ 
¶7. (SBU) In July 2000 MARA began developing regulations 
which would have prohibited imports of all food and feed 
products not accompanied by `GMO-free' certificates. 
However, pressure from industry groups - primarily the 
poultry industry and feed millers association - convinced 
the GOT to suspend implementation.  Since then, the GOT has 
been much more engaged with industry representatives on this 
issue.  Hopefully, any future legislation would be more 
industry-friendly. 
 
 
--------- 
Labelling 
--------- 
¶8. (SBU) There are no requirements that food products or 
feed containing GMOs be labelled.  In the future, however, 
Turkey may opt to require labelling of processed foods 
containing GMO ingredients.  Given past experience, the 
threshold will be as low as the current EU directives.  Some 
companies voluntarily label their products "GMO Free" for 
marketing purposes.  However, there are no regulations 
governing the use of these labels in Turkey. 
 
 
------------------- 
Traceability System 
------------------- 
¶9.  (SBU) There are no traceability requirements for food or 
feed in Turkey nor any regulations in place.  No 
documentation requirements have been announced and none are 
in place concerning GMOs. 
 
 
------- 
Testing 
------- 
¶10. (SBU)  Currently, no imported or domestic products are 
being tested for GMO content.  Although there is no 
legislation in place, the Genetics Laboratory at the Ankara 
Provincial Control Laboratory of Molecular Biology has been 
staffed and equipped recently and is awaiting legislation to 
begin their work to test imports and domestic products for 
GMO content. 
 
 
------------------ 
Ministry Oversight 
------------------ 
¶11.  (SBU) Currently, MARA has oversight for biotechnology 
by default since no legislation specifies GOT authority on 
this issue.  Within MARA, Protection and Control (Quarantine 
Service) should have the lead, but in reality the Production 
and Development Agency is responsible.  In the future, 
responsibility for biotechnology may be spread among 
different agencies including MARA and the Ministry of 
Environment. In addition, a Biotechnology and Biosafety 
Advisory Committee, which would include representatives from 
MARA, Environment, Health, Forestry, State Planning Office, 
and the Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade may also play a 
role in developing a national biosafety system as well as 
legislation. One official indicated that the Biosafety 
Advisory Committee would be `formed' in February 2004. 
 
 
-------------------- 
Comment:  The Future 
--------------------- 
¶12.  (SBU)  It is inevitable that Turkey will adopt some 
sort of legislation in the near future.  In general, Turkish 
regulatory officials appear to be uninformed about this 
topic.  Given past experiences, we would expect fairly 
restrictive legislation.  However, there are pro- 
biotechnology voices including those in the agriculture 
sector that have been advocating for a more liberal policy. 
 
 
Edelman