null
Diana T Fritz  03/21/2007 12:17:51 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Search Results

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLASSIFIED

SIPDIS
TELEGRAM                                            July 16, 2003


To:       No Action Addressee                                    

Action:   Unknown                                                

From:     AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI (ABU DHABI 3300 - ROUTINE)         

TAGS:     PREL, KPAO                                             

Captions: None                                                   

Subject:  AMBASSADOR SPEAKS OUT ON MEPI                          

Ref:      None                                                   
_________________________________________________________________
UNCLAS        ABU DHABI 03300

SIPDIS
Laser1:
    INFO:   FCS 
CXABU:
    ACTION: ECON 
    INFO:   P/M AMB DCM POL 

DISSEMINATION: ECON
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: AMB:MMWAHBA
DRAFTED: ADCM:KVANDEVATE
CLEARED: ECON:OJOHN

VZCZCADI190
RR RUEHC RUEHEE
DE RUEHAD #3300 1970832
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160832Z JUL 03
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0862
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ABU DHABI 003300 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/IPA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD AND NEA/RA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL TC
SUBJECT:  AMBASSADOR SPEAKS OUT ON MEPI 
 
 
¶1. Summary: In the last two weeks, the Ambassador has used 
a number of public fora, including the Emirates Center for 
Strategic Studies and Research and the UAE Diplomatic 
Institute, to explain and promote the Middle East 
Partnership Initiative (MEPI) and related initiatives such 
as the Middle East Free Trade Area (MEFTA) and Partnerships 
for Learning.  In contrast to the chilly reception that 
such approaches received upon MEPI's introduction, our UAE 
interlocutors and audiences are now not only receptive to 
but also eager for information about how MEPI will work and 
what it can do for them.  These discussions highlighted the 
opportunities offered by MEPI for institution-building on 
many levels, and received positive coverage in local Arabic 
print media. 
 
¶2. (RECOMMENDATION: As MEPI, MEFTA, P4L and our other 
initiatives in the region gain momentum, there will be 
increased demand here for information on them and a need 
for USG officials and those actually involved in MEPI 
programs to speak out more.  Post welcomes the recently 
issued fact sheets on MEPI but notes that to date only one 
has been issued in Arabic.  We need materials in Arabic 
available simultaneously with the English to support 
effective outreach on MEPI. Interest is high, but we must 
have effective tools with which to meet it.  END 
RECOMMENDATION) End summary 
 
¶3. On July 7, the Ambassador spoke at a round table at the 
Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research on MEPI 
and MEFTA.  The event was well attended by the Emirati 
community, including Sheikh Hamid Bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, 
Presidential son and Head of the Abu Dhabi Department of 
the Economy.  Sheikh Hamid asked whether MEFTA would also 
encourage intra-Arab trade, still very low, and asked how 
to initiate a Free Trade Agreement.  Questions were 
thoughtful and related to the implementation of MEPI, in 
particular economic issues.   The head of the government- 
owned Emirates News Agency (WAM) praised a recent media 
training program conducted by PAO for WAM staff, requesting 
that more such programs be conducted under MEPI and 
volunteering the UAE as a venue for regional media 
training. (NOTE: Post highly recommends that the MEPI 
office consider this proposal, which offers an opportunity 
not only to increase professionalism in the media but also 
to insure more accurate reporting on US policy.)  The only 
really negative comment came from one journalist commenting 
that "Arab intellectuals" fear that the Middle East Free 
Trade Area was a back door attempt by the USG to benefit 
the economy of Israel.  The Ambassador dismissed these 
speculations out of hand. 
 
¶4.  On July 14, the Ambassador also gave a similar 
presentation, in Arabic, to a group of 23 young UAE 
diplomats, among them four women, plus three UAE 
Ambassadors at the newly-established Emirates Diplomatic 
Institute. Headed by veteran UAE diplomat Dr. Yousuf al- 
Hassan, the Institute has drawn upon the example of NFATC 
and diplomatic training institutes in other countries in 
designing its curricula.  Dr. Hassan has expressed great 
interest in learning more about MEPI and its practical 
applications. He was among the first officials to whom post 
reached out to explain MEPI after its launch, and he 
organized a seminar on MEPI shortly after our first visit 
to him.  (We noted that the tremendous skepticism Dr. al- 
Hassan voiced about MEPI initially has moderated 
noticeably.) 
 
¶5.  In her presentation, the Ambassador described MEPI, 
MEFTA, and P4L, giving examples of programs underway and 
emphasizing that these new US initiatives were conceived in 
a spirit of true partnership.  The diplomats asked about 
the starting date and mechanisms for implementation, and 
the women students inquired about MEPI's potential for 
women.  As on other occasions, we have observed a growing 
interest in MEPI and a great appetite for information. 
While there is still suspicion that MEPI is a plot to 
remake the Arab world in an American image (especially in 
the highly sensitive area of curricula), there is also 
genuine interest in the opportunities it offers for student 
and citizens' exchanges, women and entrepreneurship, trade 
and political liberalization.  A key point of interest to 
all our audiences is the opening they see to convey a 
better image of the Arab world and Islam to America and 
Americans. Many here feel deeply misunderstood and look to 
MEPI as a vehicle for correcting these misperceptions. 
 
¶6. REQUEST: Post reiterates the request in our MEPI 
strategy for posts to receive small grant authority so that 
we can respond to requests for small projects for NGOs, 
educational institutions, or media training. END REQUEST 
Wahba