This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L YEREVAN 003032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CACEN, PM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/18/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL MOPS AM
SUBJECT: GOAM SIGNALS AGREEMENT FOR DEPLOYMENT OF TRUCK 
COMPANY TO IRAQ 
 
REF: A. STATE 318113 
 
     ¶B. YEREVAN 02668 
     ¶C. YEREVAN 02883 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JOHN ORDWAY FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified the 
Embassy by diplomatic note that the GOAM had agreed to the 
deployment of cargo-carrying trucks to stability operations 
in Iraq.  Foreign Minister Oskanyan confirmed to the 
Ambassador that the Ministry of Defense was in the process of 
collecting military trucks for use in Iraq.   The Ambassador 
suggested that Armenian military experts be sent to CENTCOM 
in Tampa, Florida, or that the MOD provide the Armenian 
liaison officer at CENTCOM with specific technical questions 
to speed the deployment process.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent a diplomatic note 
dated December 16 to the Embassy stating that the "Government 
of the Republic of Armenia agrees to meet the request of the 
American side( and agrees to designate an Armenia 
cargo-carrying company to participate in operation Iraqi 
Freedom II" (NOTE:  Foreign Minister Oskanyan confirmed to 
the Ambassador that the military unit under discussion was 
the truck company as requested in ref A.  END NOTE.)  The 
diplomatic note further stated that the MFA "suggests 
arranging a meeting between the representatives of the 
Government of the Republic of Armenia and the United States 
Embassy to discuss technical and procedural details." 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador met with Foreign Minister Oskanyan 
December 17 and discussed the possible deployment.  Oskanyan 
informed the Ambassador that the Ministry of Defense was in 
the process of collecting the requested units, an effort that 
"might take time."  In order to speed the process, the 
Ambassador reiterated the suggestion he had made earlier to 
Defense Minister Sargsyan that the MOD dispatch specialists 
to CENTCOM in Tampa, Florida to assist in the pre-deployment 
process, or that the MOD provide the Armenian liaison officer 
already at CENTCOM with a list of technical questions 
regarding the trucks to present to CENTCOM officials. 
Oskanyan also noted that the GOAM had yet to conclude a 
Status of Forces Agreement with Kuwait, though negotiations 
were ongoing. 
 
¶4. (C) The Embassy had pressed the GOAM to agree to the 
deployment (refs A and B).  The Ambassador discussed the 
possible deployment with Defense Minister Sargsyan and with 
leading Armenian Diaspora members who subsequently intervened 
directly with President Kocharian and the Defense Minister. 
During visits in November, General Charles Wald, Deputy 
Commander of EUCOM, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State 
Lynn Pascoe separately requested the Armenian deployment with 
senior GOAM officials (ref C). 
 
¶5. (U) HQ Coalition Baghdad Minimize Considered. 
ORDWAY