This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KUWAIT 002101 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID/W 
STATE PLEASE REPEAT TO IO COLLECTIVE 
STATE FOR PRM/ANE, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, IO AND SA/PAB 
NSC FOR EABRAMS, SMCCORMICK, STAHIR-KHELI, JDWORKEN 
USAID FOR USAID/A, DCHA/AA, DCHA/RMT, DCHA/FFP 
USAID FOR DCHA/OTI, DCHA/DG, ANE/AA 
USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA:WGARVELINK, BMCCONNELL, KFARNSWORTH USAID FOR 
ANE/AA:WCHAMBERLIN 
ROME FOR FODAG 
GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH 
DOHA FOR MSHIRLEY 
ANKARA FOR AMB WRPEARSON, ECON AJSIROTIC AND DART 
AMMAN FOR USAID AND DART 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF IZ WFP
SUBJECT:  DART NORTHERN IRAQ UPDATE 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.    According to MORAD, more than 1,000 families have returned 
to their villages in southern Arbil governorate; one week ago the 
number was 313.  The most critical need in these villages is 
water.  There are between 130,000 and 140,000 MT of wheat (of 
unknown quality) currently in MOT stores in Kirkuk, but, 
according to WFP, several issues need to be addressed before the 
PDS is resumed: security, MOT infrastructure, and MOT salaries. 
According to the Ministry of Health in As Sulaymaniyah, health 
priorities include vaccines, drugs, suturing materials, 
communicable diseases, and training.  UNHCR's Northern Iraq 
Coordinator is advocating that IDPs not return to their home 
villages at this time.  However, UNHCR's Northern Iraq 
Coordinator also stressed to the DART the importance of helping 
those who have already returned and recognized that returns will 
likely continue despite best efforts to delay them.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
MINISTRY OF RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  The Ministry of Reconstruction and Development (MORAD) hosted 
a coordination meeting on 10 May in Arbil.  The DART, non- 
governmental organizations (NGOs), international organizations 
(IOs), and the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian 
Assistance (ORHA) were in attendance. 
 
¶3.  The Minister began the meeting by providing an update on the 
situation in southern Arbil Governorate.  The Ministry led a tour 
to that region earlier in the week to show humanitarian workers 
those villages they hope to see repopulated by Kurdish IDPs.  The 
Minister stated there are now more than 1,000 families that have 
returned to their villages, while one week ago the number was 
¶313. 
 
¶4.  Emergency needs for these returnees were discussed, with 
water being the most important.  Thirteen villages are said to be 
in urgent need of water.  The United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) stated that using water tankers to bring water into 
villages was the most practical method for meeting short-term 
needs.  Shelter needs were also discussed, with UNOPS, REACH (a 
local NGO), and Peace Winds Japan offering to look at the 
provision of tents. 
 
¶5.  A representative from the Ministry of Humanitarian Aid and 
Cooperation (MOHAC) stated that MOHAC is assessing the needs of 
returnees and that an additional 966 IDP families, living in the 
Duhok area, want to return to southern Arbil Governorate.  The 
NGOs and IOs present were asked to assist in the IDPs' return. 
 
¶6.  An ORHA representative stated that everyone must be cautious 
about encouraging IDP movements.  She said that the interim 
authority must establish itself so that proper processes for 
land, property, and other return issues can be addressed 
properly.  The ORHA representative also stated that the Kurdish 
Regional Government (KRG) was not in charge of some areas where 
IDPs wished to return, such as Kirkuk and Mosul, and that "we are 
not in the process of moving boundaries."  The Minister responded 
to these remarks by saying that such issues should be brought up 
at a higher political level and not in an NGO coordination 
meeting.  The ORHA representative then said that ORHA would have 
preferred that those IDPs who already returned to their villages 
had not done so. 
 
¶7.  A discussion ensued about whether or not providing assistance 
to returnees would encourage others to return and, therefore, 
whether or not assistance should be limited.  Several NGO and IO 
representatives told ORHA that the humanitarian agencies would 
provide aid if needed and that people would return to their 
villages regardless of politics.  MORAD reiterated the need to 
assist returnees. 
 
(Comment: This rather tense discussion generated necessary debate 
about the IDP and returnee issue in northern Iraq.  The pressure 
- real or perceived - on IDPs to repopulate regions south of the 
green line will affect the political dynamics in this part of 
Iraq.  How the international community, especially ORHA, reacts 
to this issue could have profound effects on the politics in 
northern Iraq.  End comment.) 
 
------------- 
WFP LOGISTICS 
------------- 
 
¶8.  The DART met with WFP's logistics coordinator in Arbil, on 10 
May, to discuss WFP capacity and its plans to step up the Public 
Distribution System (PDS) in Mosul and Kirkuk.  With between 
130,000 and 140,000 metric tons (MT) of wheat (of unknown 
quality) currently in Ministry of Trade (MOT) stores in Kirkuk, 
and possibly 250,000 MT (also of unknown quality) in Mosul, 
WFP/Logistics sees its first priority as cleaning out and making 
minor repairs to silos and MOT warehouses.  This includes milling 
good grain, removing bad grain, and making storage complexes able 
to absorb the upcoming harvest.  WFP reports that cooperation 
with MOT staff in Kirkuk has been good, and they will soon begin 
collaborating in Mosul. 
 
¶9.  WFP noted that there are several issues that need to be 
addressed as the PDS is resumed: security, MOT infrastructure, 
and MOT salaries.  Regarding security, Coalition forces are 
guarding WFP warehouses in Mosul, and have arranged for local 
police to guard WFP and MOT warehouses in Kirkuk.  WFP is very 
pleased with Coalition support, and they say Coalition-provided 
local security in Kirkuk is helping strengthen the MOT's 
confidence. 
 
¶10.  WFP will not re-equip looted MOT offices (they say this is 
ORHA's job), but they will assist in silo and warehouse cleaning 
and repairs (beginning Monday in Kirkuk) and provide some MOT 
food staff office infrastructure at these complexes.   WFP states 
it will play a role in minor repair of storage infrastructure, 
but that ORHA needs to support major repair and MOT office 
equipment.  Salaries are still a big issue as MOT employees in 
Mosul and Kirkuk have yet to be paid the emergency USD 20 
stipend, let alone a formal salary.  Some employees of other 
sectors, including railway staff and teachers for example, have 
apparently been paid informally.  (Comment: It would be 
beneficial to inform government personnel when and how much they 
will be paid.  End comment.) 
 
¶11.  WFP is now able to travel on a daily basis to Kirkuk and 
Mosul, although Mosul is still classified by the U.N. as Phase IV 
security.  WFP will soon have at least two international staff 
based in Mosul (program and logistics) and at least one 
international logistics officer in Kirkuk.  WFP will concentrate 
on getting things moving with MOT infrastructure and staff in 
Kirkuk, and then focus on Mosul in the coming days.  WFP reported 
that Tikrit is the only area to which no food has yet been 
delivered. Tikrit is still Phase V security, and the U.N. 
Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD) has not yet visited.  Given the 
present security situation and restricted travel to Baghdad, WFP 
envisions its staff gradually expanding its areas of operation 
from the Kuwaiti border north to Baghdad and from Arbil south to 
Baghdad. Therefore, Tikrit will likely be accessed, at least 
initially, from the north. 
 
--------------------------------- 
AS SULAYMANIYAH MINITRY OF HEALTH 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  The DART visited the Ministry of Health in As Sulaymaniyah 
on 11 May.  The deputy minister and several directors provided a 
general overview of the health system in As Sulaymaniyah 
Governorate.  Primary health care, vaccinations, nutrition, 
malaria prevention, mobile health monitoring, and health 
education programs were discussed, as was the relationship 
between the Ministry and U.N. organizations. 
 
¶13.  Ministry officials state that health priorities include 
vaccines, drugs, suturing materials, communicable diseases, and 
training.  Vaccine supply schedules have been erratic and, as a 
result, often arrive with a short shelf life.  Certain drugs and 
other supplies are in short supply, and doctors are worried that 
the supply pipeline will not open before current supplies are 
exhausted.  Communicable diseases are a major worry as summer 
approaches; waterborne diseases and malaria are also of concern. 
Training and general motivation of staff are other concerns in 
the medical community.  In the very near future, there will be 
heavy demand for training programs in all health care sectors. 
 
---------------- 
UNHCR's IDP ROLE 
---------------- 
 
¶14.  The DART met with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees' 
(UNHCR) Northern Iraq Coordinator on 12 May to discuss current 
UNHCR activities.  Over the last week, UNHCR has held meetings 
and conducted assessments in Arbil, As Sulaymaniyah, and Tamim 
Governorates and plans to depart for Dohuk Governorate on 13 May. 
In meetings with KRG officials in Arbil and As Sulaymaniyah, 
UNHCR's Northern Iraq Coordinator reports that he is advocating 
that the governments dissuade IDPs residing in their governorates 
from returning to their home villages at this time.  UNHCR has 
funds to support public information campaigns to explain that it 
may be premature for IDPs to return home. 
 
¶15.  UNHCR's Northern Iraq Coordinator also stressed the 
importance of helping those who have already returned and 
recognized that returns will likely continue despite best efforts 
to delay them.  UNHCR, using flash appeal funds, has the capacity 
to provide emergency shelter and non-food items (NFIs), as well 
as supplies to build permanent homes for those who have already 
returned.  This includes those who recently returned to Makmour 
in southern Arbil Governorate.  While much attention has been 
placed on Makmour, UNHCR's Northern Iraq Coordinator noted that 
returns have also occurred in the other northern governorates. 
UNHCR/Iraq has requested 2,000 tents from their stockpiles in 
Turkey to meet the needs of those returning.  More are available 
if needed. 
 
¶16.  UNHCR explained that the IDP issue has been contentious 
within the U.N.  However, UNHCR's Northern Iraq Coordinator 
believes that, while UNHCR will not be formally tasked, they will 
have de facto lead on return and reintegration issues for several 
reasons.  UNHCR's Northern Iraq Coordinator noted that UNHCR has 
prior experience working on protection and return issues, that 
many of the issues related to return will be the same for 
returning refugees and IDPs, and that many of the other U.N. 
organizations are operationally restricted by the U.N. Security 
Council Resolution (UNSCR) 986 umbrella. 
 
¶17.  There are three international UNHCR staff in Iraq.  UNHCR 
hopes to increase its international staff and open five offices 
in Duhok, Arbil, As Sulaymaniyah, Mosul, and Kirkuk.  UNHCR noted 
that an updated reintegration plan and budget for Iraq would be 
presented to donors in Geneva this week.  UNHCR recognizes that 
their role in returns and reintegration will be largely dependent 
on the decisions of occupying forces.  UNHCR's Northern Iraq 
Coordinator noted that he had not yet met with anyone from OHRA. 
 
JONES