This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091723Z Oct 03C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PINS EPET ECON NI
SUBJECT: STRIKE IS OFF, DEREGULATION MAY STILL BE ON 
 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1735 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1731 
     ¶C. LAGOS 2078 
     ¶D. LAGOS 2069 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY COUNSELOR JAMES MAXSTADT FOR REASONS 1.5 B AND 
¶D. 
 
 
¶1. (U) After a "Stakeholders' Forum" October 8, mediating 
Governor Bola Tinubu announced a four-point agreement between 
them on behalf of the GON's oil company, oil marketers and 
the unions: 
 
 
-- The GON-owned NigeriaN National Petroleum Corporation 
(NNPC) will maintain the present price on gasoline it sells 
to marketers; 
 
 
-- The major oil marketers will revert to charging public the 
pre-October 1 fuel price of 34 Naira per liter temporarily 
(until at least the meeting below); 
 
 
-- The Nigeria Labor Congress (NLC) will call off the strike; 
and 
 
 
-- All stakeholders will meet as soon as possible to work out 
deregulation of the downstream sector. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Five Governors, the Speaker of the House and the 
Senate President were the main mediators.  Contacts at the 
NNPC and one Governor's office tell us the Stakeholders' 
Committee meeting in point four will begin on Thursday 
October 16. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The reversion to 34 Naira at the pump fits with 
reports post has received from NNPC and other sources that 
the marketers will be able to maintain that price for 
anywhere from a week to a month from stocks on hand imported 
before deregulation.  That price has not always applied 
outside Lagos, Abuja and Port Harcourt, although more than 
the main five Governors pledged separately to ensure that 34 
Naira will be the price charged in their states. 
 
 
¶4. (C) President Obasanjo gave a nationally televised speech 
just before the Stakeholders' Forum, calling for the NLC to 
reach agreement with the marketers and NNPC through the 
mediation.  He has not yet publicly commented since.  He has 
stated numerous times since October 1 that deregulation is on 
and that the GON is thus no longer responsible for the price 
that the marketers set.  COMMENT:  The current reversion to 
34 Naira does not contradict this posture, although the GON's 
deregulation instructions to marketers had reportedly told 
them to keep the gasoline price at the pump below 40 Naira 
for October, the first month of deregulation. 
ROBERTS