This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH PRESS SLAMS US DETENTION OF TURKISH 
SPECIAL FORCES 
 
REF: ANKARA 4232 
 
 
¶1.  Public reaction and rhetoric about the Turkish SF 
detained in Iraq continues to mount in Turkey as evidenced by 
increasingly large demonstrations  at our missions and more 
vociferous statements to the  press by government  officials. 
 Headlines in July 6 major Turkish newspapers -- "The Ugly 
American," (Milliyet) "What Kind of Strategic Partner?" 
(Radikal) reflect the overall tone of the local press.  Much 
of the anger is directed against Col. William Mayville, whom 
most assume to have led the US operation in Suleymaniye.  A 
front-page headline in "Hurriyet," Turkey's 
largest-circulation daily, reads "let this man know his 
place."  "Sabah" details a list of "evidence" that Col. 
Mayville has systematically favored the Kurds at the expense 
of Turkmen and Arabs in northern Iraq. 
 
 
¶2. Many press articles characterize the US action as an 
attempt to force all Turkish troops out of northern Iraq, and 
a "Hurriyet" columnist claims that all Turkish SF have been 
asked by the US to leave within 3 months.  Most also 
speculate that US forces relied on PUK intelligence sources 
to justify the raid, and left-leaning "Cumhuriyet" suggests 
Kurdish groups are "provoking" the US into taking actions 
that are "dragging Northern Iraq toward instability."  A 
Washington correspondent for "Sabah" argues the operation was 
carried out without the prior knowledge of the State 
Department, the White House, or senior US civilian 
authorities in Iraq.  Prominent "Radikal" columnist Murat 
Yetkin, however, claims that the US delay in giving a full 
explanation of the incident leads to the conclusion that the 
action was part of "US state policy" rather than a local 
military initiative. 
 
 
¶3. All papers carry statements by opposition party leaders 
condemning the detentions and blasting the AKP government for 
"weakness" or negligence" for failing to prevent them. 
Articles claim that the Secretary confirmed to FM Gul that 24 
Turks had been taken to Baghdad and were still under 
detention.  The Secretary reportedly told Gul that he hoped 
the situation could be resolved by Sunday evening.  Gul told 
the press that he viewed the incident as a "local event" of 
which Washington "was not informed." The FM also reaffirmed 
his intention to visit Washington in coming days. 
 
 
¶4. Leftist Labor Party leader and troublemaker Dogu Perincek 
continued to stir anti-American sentiment.  Perincek 
reportedly commented on Turkish television that "it would be 
good" if Turkey were to take some American officers prisoner. 
 
 
PEARSON