This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000748 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (BUCKLEY), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO PGOV IZ HO PA
SUBJECT:  HONDURAN ATMOSPHERICS - IRAQ 
 
¶1. Moderate Daily El Heraldo 3/22 - Article on a forum for 
students on the conflict in Iraq sponsored by the youth of 
the Democratic Unification Party (a leftist party made up of 
the remnants of the Socialists and Communist parties of the 
1980s).  Among the speakers was Carlos Reyes of the Bloque 
Popular (an NGO representing labor unions and other group 
opposed to globalization) and UD party members.  "The 
invasion of Iraq is part of a global [U.S.] strategy of 
gaining economic, political and military hegemony over the 
world.  Economically, the main project is FTAA, through 
which the U.S. seeks to challenge the EU and Japan; 
politically, the plan is to get rid of independent regimes 
and opposition movements; and the military is the means that 
will be used to achieve the other goals."  According to the 
president of the UD, this is "a war without humanitarian 
ends, one that "strengthens imperialism."  He also called 
the U.S. "the number one enemy of the people of the world." 
 
Note:  The Bloque Popular organized a small demonstration 
yesterday (250 people) in front of the U.S., Spanish and 
British Embassies and UN Headquarters to protest the war. 
 
¶2. "El Heraldo" 3/22 - Honduran Secretary of State Guillermo 
Perez Cadalzo said, "Latin America has taken a step 
backwards in the priority list of the United States.  George 
Bush's promise that this would be `the century of the 
Americas' has been put on hold since September 11.. The war 
will create problems in the already fragile relationhip 
between Latin-American countries, especially those that 
opposed the war, and the United States." 
 
¶3.  "El Heraldo" 3/22 - ran a page of political comment on 
the war in drawings.  One was entitled Remember Vietnam and 
featured a likeness of the child burned by Napalm who was 
filmed running down the road and a U.S. soldier. Another was 
entitled "Blood for Oil."  A third features the letters UN 
(ONU) decorating a roll of toilet paper. 
 
¶4. "El Heraldo" 3/24 - carried seven pages reporting on the 
war against Iraq. Among the headlines are:  "Missile Rains 
over Baghdad," "Enraged battles," "Baghdad's defense is On," 
"Life Goes On for Iraqi People After the Bombs," "Russia 
Accused of Helping Iraq by Providing Electronic Technology 
to Guide Missiles," "War from different angles" (this is a 
picture gallery showing U.S. as well as Iraqi soldiers), 
"More Demonstrations Against the War Around the World." 
 
¶5.  "El Heraldo" 3/24 - Political cartoon shows a motorist 
asking a gasoline station attendant to "fill the tank with 
Iraqi blood, please." 
 
¶6. San Pedro Sula-based liberal party paper "La Prensa" 3/22 
- featured an image of the attack last Friday on the cover. 
It also carried seven pages of stories and images on Iraq. 
Cover headlines: "Devastating;" other headlines "Impact and 
Terror;" "Day A: Third Day of War;" "Like a Movie;" "U.S. 
Army Negotiated Before Attacking;" "Saddam: alive or dead?" 
"Nights of panic for Iraqi people." 
 
¶7. "La Prensa" 3/22 - political cartoonist Daro Banegas 
shows President Bush holding three signs, two of them 
against abortion and cloning, and the third one supporting 
war. 
 
¶8. "La Prensa" 3/23 - cover story featured a picture of a 
demonstration in Bangladesh entitled  "More Protests."  The 
newspaper carried nine pages on the war, including the 
following headlines: "Basra Besieged," "Burning Oil in 
Kuwait," "U.S. Government is Unsure if Iraq Will Use Weapons 
of Mass Destruction," "The Day After in Baghdad," There 
might be Difficult Days: General Frank," "ONU Expects More 
than 600,000 Refugees." 
 
¶9. "La Prensa" 3/24 - carried 14 pages of coverage on the 
war, focusing on the U.S. POWs as well as the demonstration 
supporting the war in Washington. 
 
¶10. Liberal "El Tiempo" 3/24 - Carried six pages on the war. 
The cover shows a picture of U.S. soldiers in Iraq, with 
"Honduras has not sent troops to Iraq" as the headline. 
 
¶11. "El Tiempo" 3/24 - cartoon by political cartoonist 
Dumont entitled, "The Oscar goes to most stubborn," shows 
death announcing the Oscar winners. The candidates are 
Saddam Hussein and George Bush, who are partially covered by 
skulls. 
 
¶12. "El Tiempo" 3/24 - carried a three-page picture gallery 
on Iraq. 
 
PALMER