null
Diana T Fritz  03/21/2007 12:23:00 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Search Results

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLASSIFIED

SIPDIS
TELEGRAM                                            July 07, 2003


To:       No Action Addressee                                    

Action:   Unknown                                                

From:     AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI (ABU DHABI 3164 - PRIORITY)        

TAGS:     EINV, ECON, KSPR, KPRP                                 

Captions: None                                                   

Subject:  UAE: 2003 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT                 

Ref:      None                                                   
_________________________________________________________________
UNCLAS        ABU DHABI 03164

SIPDIS
CXABU:
    ACTION: ECON 
    INFO:   P/M AMB DCM POL 
Laser1:
    INFO:   FCS 

DISSEMINATION: ECON
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: ADCM:KVANDEVATE
DRAFTED: ECON: CCRUMPLER/GRAN
CLEARED: C/ECON: OJOHN/TWILLIAMS, FCS:JLANCIA, POL:MMMENARD

VZCZCADI815
PP RUEHC RUEHZM RUCPDOC RUEATRS RUCPCIM
DE RUEHAD #3164/01 1880651
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 070651Z JUL 03
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0733
INFO RUEHZM/GCC COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPCIM/CIMS NTDB WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 ABU DHABI 003164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
STATE PASS TO USTR AND OPIC 
USDOC FOR 4520/ITA/MAC/ONE/GUGLIELMI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON KSPR KTBD KPRP OPIC TC
SUBJECT:  UAE: 2003 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
REF:  STATE 128494 
 
UAE:  INVESTMENT CLIMATE 
------------------------ 
 
13.a.1.  Openness To Foreign Investment 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Investment laws and regulations are evolving in the UAE and are 
expected to become more conducive to foreign investment.  At 
present, the regulatory and legal framework favors local over 
foreign investors.  There is no national treatment for investors 
in the UAE, and foreign ownership of land and stocks is 
restricted.  The Emirate of Dubai announced in 2002, however, 
that it would permit so-called "free hold" real estate ownership 
by non-GCC nationals within certain properties, though the exact 
legal status is still uncertain.  Because investment regulations 
vary from emirate to emirate, it is recommended that potential 
investors consult a local attorney to obtain the most current 
investment information at an early stage of planning. 
 
The UAEG is opening up its trade sectors in line with the UAE's 
WTO obligations, and is drafting a landmark law on foreign direct 
investment that should be approved later this year.  The law 
reportedly will include new tax exemptions and other incentives. 
The UAEG already has taken steps to cut red tape for foreign 
investors, and now exempts investors from obtaining a Ministry of 
Labor card in addition to an Immigration Department visa. 
Investors no longer need to appear in person to inquire about the 
status of business applications in Abu Dhabi.  A new automated 
service, offered in Arabic and English, allows investors to 
receive information about their business licenses over the phone. 
 
There have been no significant investment disputes during the 
past few years involving U.S. or other foreign investors.  Claims 
resolution has not generally been a problem, although foreign 
companies tend not to press claims. 
 
Regulation of the establishment and conduct of business in the 
UAE is shared at the federal and emirate levels.  In general, 
foreign companies (except companies from GCC countries) that 
undertake business activities in the UAE or make their products 
available in the UAE have entered into a joint venture with UAE 
nationals for the establishment of limited liability companies, 
appointed commercial agents, or set up branch offices.  Except 
for companies located in the free zones, at least 51 percent of a 
business establishment must be owned by a UAE national.  A 
business engaged in importing and distributing a product must be 
either a 100 percent UAE owned agency/distributorship or a 51/49 
percent (UAE/foreign) limited liability company.  Subsidies for 
manufacturing firms are available only to those companies with at 
least 51 percent local ownership. 
 
OIL WILL CONTINUE TO BE A MAJOR SECTOR FOR FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN 
Â¶2003.  UAE OIL PRODUCTION CAPACITY CURRENTLY IS AROUND 2.5 
MILLION BARRELS PER DAY (MB/D).  IT SHOULD RISE TO 2.8 AND 3.0 
MB/D BY 2005 AND 2010, RESPECTIVELY.  ABU DHABI COMPANY FOR 
ONSHORE OPERATIONS (ADCO) PLANS TO LIFT PRODUCTION TO 1.45 MB/D, 
ABU DHABI MARINE OPERATING COMPANY (ADMA-OPCO) TO 600,000 B/D AND 
ZAKUM DEVELOPMENT COMPANY (ZADCO) TO 600,000 B/D DURING THE NEXT 
THREE TO FIVE YEARS.  AS PART OF THE EFFORT TO CONTINUE TO 
IMPROVE OUTPUT AND SEEK FOREIGN TECHNOLOGICAL AND MANAGERIAL 
EXPERTISE, THE STATE-RUN ABU DHABI NATIONAL OIL COMPANY (ADNOC) 
TENDERED THE PRIVATIZATION OF A 28 PERCENT STAKE IN THE OFFSHORE 
ZAKUM OILFIELD IN APRIL 2002.  EXXONMOBIL, CHEVRONTEXACO, SHELL, 
BP AND TOTALFINAELF ARE PARTICIPATING IN THIS CONTEST, WITH AN 
OUTCOME EXPECTED IN 2003.  IN 2002, THE UNITED STATES ENJOYED A 
45 PERCENT MARKET SHARE IN OIL AND GAS FIELD EQUIPMENT, SPARE 
PARTS, AND SERVICES.  NO REGULATORY/DEMAND ISSUES AFFECT THE 
MARKET. 
 
We are optimistic that opportunities for foreign investment in 
the public utilities sector will increase as well.  In March 1998 
the Abu Dhabi Water and Electricity Authority (ADWEA) awarded a 
contract for the UAE's first independent water and power project 
(IWPP), with an estimated value of USD $750 million, to an 
American firm.  The firm was selected as part of an Anglo- 
American consortium to manage the emirate's second IWPP in 2001. 
The Abu Dhabi government has announced that power generation 
(includes power and desalinated water production) and 
transmission will be privatized, while power distribution will 
remain under the control of Abu Dhabi authorities.  The estimated 
commercial value of planned power and water sector development 
projects in Abu Dhabi is USD $10 billion. 
 
Defense contractors with an eye for investment in the UAE must 
negotiate directly with the UAE Offsets Group (UOG), and invest 
an amount that will generate a profit equal to an agreed upon 
portion of their contract in the UAE.  UOG investment projects 
generally must show the required profit after seven years.  The 
contractor may not own more than 49 percent of the project, and 
UAE nationals must hold the remaining 51 percent.  There are 
currently more than 25 offset ventures; offset projects cover the 
full spectrum of economic activity, including, inter alia, 
advertising, fish farming, air conditioning, language centers, 
shipbuilding, aircraft maintenance, leasing, medical services, 
and even polo grounds.  Two of the largest offset ventures are an 
international gas pipeline project (Dolphin) and the Oasis 
International leasing company -- a British Aerospace offsets 
venture. 
 
There is no income tax in the UAE.  Foreign banks pay 20 percent 
tax on their profits.  Foreign oil companies with equity in 
concessions pay taxes and royalties on their proceeds.  There are 
no consumption taxes, and the GCC states formally implemented a 
single import tariff of 5 percent on most goods January 1, 2003. 
 
13.a.2.  Conversion And Transfer Policies 
----------------------------------------- 
 
There are no restrictions or delays on the import or export of 
either the UAE Dirham or foreign currencies by foreigners or UAE 
nationals, with the exception of Israeli currency and the 
currencies of those countries subject to United Nations 
sanctions.  The UAEG passed comprehensive anti-money laundering 
legislation following the attacks of September 11, 2001, that 
imposes strict documentary requirements on large wire transfers. 
Travelers entering or leaving the UAE must now declare currency 
amounts of more than 50,000 dirhams (approximately USD $13,700) 
as part of these new measures. 
 
Since November 1980, the Dirham, though formally pegged to the 
IMF's Special Drawing Rights (SDR) at the rate of 4.76190 
Dirhams/SDR (with a margin of fluctuation set initially at 2.25 
percent and widened in August 1987 to 7.25 percent) has remained 
fixed against the U.S. Dollar.  The exchange rate is 3.67 UAE 
Dirhams per one U.S. Dollar. 
 
13.a.3.  Expropriation And Compensation 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Foreign investors have not been involved in any expropriations in 
the UAE in recent years.  There are no set rules governing 
compensation if expropriations were to occur, and individual 
emirates probably would treat this differently.  In practice, 
authorities in the UAE would not expropriate unless there was a 
compelling developmental or public interest need to do so, and in 
such cases compensation would be generous. 
 
13.a.4.  Dispute Settlement 
--------------------------- 
 
There have been no significant investment disputes during the 
past few years involving U.S. or other foreign investors, but 
there have been several contractor disputes, with the government 
as well as local businesses.  Disputes generally are resolved by 
arbitration, by the parties themselves, or by recourse to the 
legal system.  Dispute resolution can be difficult and uncertain, 
however.  Arbitration may commence by petition to the federal 
courts on the basis of mutual consent, a written arbitration 
agreement, independently or by nomination of arbitrators, or 
through a referral to an appointing authority without recourse to 
judicial proceedings.  Enforcing arbitration judgments can be 
difficult as they require court certification, and judicial 
proceedings may continue for several years. 
 
The UAE constitution established a federal court system while 
acknowledging the right of the individual emirates to maintain a 
court system of their own.  Accordingly, each emirate applies 
federal law in its own court system that consists of courts of 
first instance, courts of appeal and a Supreme Court.  The court 
of first instance consists of civil, criminal, and sharia 
(Islamic law) courts.  Sharia law is only applicable to Muslims 
and relates to family matters mentioned in the Koran.  Courts 
will interpret statutory law and legal precedent in deciding 
cases.  Commercial disputes involving foreign parties tend to 
come before the civil courts in the federal system; a panel of 
three judges ordinarily hears commercial disputes.  All cases 
involving banks and financial institutions are required to be 
heard by civil courts.  In Abu Dhabi, all non-arbitration 
commercial disputes are first brought to the Abu Dhabi 
Conciliation Department.  If the parties are unable to reach a 
settlement, they can begin legal proceedings in the court of 
first instance. 
 
The UAE federal Supreme Court has held that a foreign arbitration 
clause in a registered commercial agency agreement is 
unenforceable because the Commercial Agency Law of 1981 states 
that UAE courts have jurisdiction over commercial agency 
disputes.  According to an analysis by Western-trained attorneys 
of the UAE code of civil procedure, however, UAE courts will 
recognize a decision by both parties to refer a dispute to 
arbitration.  No party in a dispute can file a court claim if 
such party already has agreed to refer the claim to arbitration. 
The parties can move to arbitration at any stage during 
litigation.  The civil procedure code details rules governing the 
qualification of arbitrators and many other aspects of the 
arbitration process.  The venue of arbitration is required to be 
within the UAE, and if not, the resultant award is treated like a 
foreign judgment. 
 
The code contains comprehensive rules in connection with the 
various types of preventive and provisional remedies prior to 
litigation and the issuance of judgments, including the 
attachment of property, confiscation of the defendant's passport 
and prohibitions on travel, as well as the detention of the 
defendant in certain instances.  However, the courts must certify 
all arbitration decisions, and though they do not review 
substantive claims, they can invalidate decisions based on 
procedural considerations.  Parties can also appeal certification 
decisions thus prolonging enforcement indefinitely. 
 
In 1993 the Abu Dhabi Chamber of Commerce and Industry formed the 
Abu Dhabi Commercial Conciliation and Arbitration Center in an 
effort to accelerate commercial dispute resolution.  The Center 
has jurisdiction to conciliate or arbitrate commercial disputes. 
Currently, the Center has 135 open cases and accepts roughly 30- 
40 new cases each year.  The Center's executive regulations 
govern the conciliation and arbitration procedure.  Though 
referral by the parties to the Dispute Center ostensibly requires 
them to accept the finality of the Center's decision, the courts 
must still certify the decision and enforcement can be delayed. 
The Center conducts proceedings in Arabic or any other agreed 
upon language. 
 
The Dubai Chamber of Commerce and Industry has promulgated 
similar commercial conciliation and arbitration rules that permit 
parties to have conciliation or arbitration proceedings under the 
auspices of the Chamber. 
 
The UAE is a member of the International Center for the 
Settlement of Investment Disputes.  In May 2003, the UAE Cabinet 
approved entry into the New York Convention of 1958 on the 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.  The UAEG 
is likely to implement the legislation enacting the Convention by 
the end of the year. 
 
13.a.5.  Performance Requirements/Incentives 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
As listed elsewhere in this report, the regulatory and legal 
framework in the UAE favors local over foreign investors.  There 
is no national treatment for investors in the UAE.  The UAE 
maintains non-tariff barriers to investment in the form of 
restrictive agency, sponsorship, and distributorship 
requirements.  In order to do business in the UAE outside one of 
the free zones, a foreign business in most cases must have a UAE 
national sponsor, agent or distributor.  Once chosen, sponsors, 
agents, or distributors have exclusive rights.  They cannot be 
replaced without their agreement.  Government tendering is not 
conducted according to generally accepted international 
standards, and re-tendering is the norm.  To bid on federal 
projects, a supplier or contractor must be either a UAE national 
or a company in which UAE nationals own at least 51 percent of 
the capital.  Federal tenders must be accompanied by a bid bond 
in the form of an unconditional bank guarantee for 5 percent of 
the value of the bid. 
 
Incentives are given to foreign investors in the free zones. 
Outside the free zones, no incentives are given, although the 
ability to purchase property as freehold in certain favored 
projects in Dubai -- and promises that foreign owners of such 
property would be granted residence permits as long as they 
remained in possession of title -- would appear to be incentives 
aimed at attracting foreign investment. 
 
Visas, residence permits, and work permits are required of all 
foreigners in the UAE except nationals from GCC countries. 
Americans are eligible to receive 10-year, multiple entry visas, 
which authorize stay up to six months per entry, with the 
possibility of a six-month extension.  U.S. citizens may obtain 
visas for business and tourism at the airport upon arrival. 
These visas do not permit employment in the UAE. 
 
13.a.6.  Right To Private Ownership And Establishment 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Except as detailed elsewhere in this report, there are no 
restrictions on the right of private entities to establish and 
own business enterprises and engage in all forms of remunerative 
activity. 
13.a.7.  Protection Of Property Rights 
-------------------------------------- 
 
The concept of a mortgage has just been introduced -- but only 
for select Dubai-based five-star property developments. 
Mortgages are generally unavailable beyond these limited 
exceptions.  Title to all land in Abu Dhabi, the largest emirate, 
resides in the ruler.  Most construction, commercial and 
residential, is financed by a specialized agency of the 
government of Abu Dhabi, and commercial banks finance the 
remainder.  Their collateral traditionally has been access to the 
rent stream of the building or the personal guarantee of the 
developer. 
 
AS PART AND PARCEL OF ITS DEVELOPMENT INTO A REGIONAL TRADING 
CENTER, THE UAEG HAS MADE THE PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
A PRIORITY IN RECENT YEARS.  NEW COPYRIGHT, TRADEMARK AND PATENT 
LAWS, PASSED IN 2002, PROVIDE HIGH LEVELS OF PROTECTION FOR U.S. 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, WHILE AN AGREEMENT -- BROKERED BY THE 
EMBASSY IN 2002 -- CONTINUES TO PROVIDE TRIPS-PLUS LEVELS OF 
PROTECTION FOR U.S. PHARMACEUTICALS. 
 
The UAEG repealed previous copyright, trademark, and patent laws 
and issued improved legislation in 2002 in harmony with 
international standards and exceeding the UAE's TRIPs 
obligations.  The new copyright law, enacted in July 2002, is the 
product of a prolonged dialog between the UAEG and international 
organizations such as WIPO and the WTO.  It grants protections to 
authors of creative works and expands the categories of protected 
works, to include computer programs, software, databases, and 
other digital works.  Efforts to combat computer software piracy 
in the UAE have been successful.  According to 2001 industry 
estimates, the rate of software piracy in the UAE is the lowest 
in the Middle East.  The UAE is recognized as the regional leader 
in fighting computer software piracy. 
 
THE UAE'S NEW TRADEMARK LAW, ALSO ISSUED IN JULY 2002, CONFIRMS 
THAT THE UAE WILL FOLLOW THE INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM 
AND THAT ONE TRADEMARK CAN BE REGISTERED IN A NUMBER OF CLASSES. 
THE NEW LAW PROVIDES THAT THE OWNER OF THE REGISTRATION SHALL 
ENJOY EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS TO THE USE OF THE TRADEMARK AS REGISTERED 
AND CAN PREVENT OTHERS FROM USING AN IDENTICAL OR SIMILAR MARK ON 
SIMILAR, IDENTICAL OR RELATED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES IF IT CAUSES 
CONFUSION AMONG CONSUMERS. 
 
THE UAEG PUBLISHED THE OFFICIAL AND FINAL VERSION IN NOVEMBER 
2002 OF THE LONG-AWAITED PATENT LAW.  SPECIFICALLY, THE PATENT 
LAW PROVIDES FOR -- IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE UAE'S TRIPS 
OBLIGATIONS -- NATIONAL TREATMENT FOR IP OWNERS IN OTHER WTO 
MEMBER STATES, BOTH PRODUCT AND PROCESS PATENT PROTECTION, AND 
ENFORCEMENT OF IPR WHEREBY CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURES AND 
REMEDIES MAY BE EMPLOYED. 
 
In March 2002, the UAE Ministries of Health and Finance and 
Industry conveyed in writing their acceptance of PhRMA's best and 
final offer under which 25 U.S. patent-protected, innovative 
products would be afforded 5-year data exclusivity protection. 
Under the terms of the agreement which PhRMA and the UAEG 
accepted, all other U.S.-patented drugs, whether pending 
registration or not, will be given data exclusivity protection in 
the UAE market equal to the patent term -- a commitment which is 
consistent with the UAE's TRIPs obligations. 
 
13.a.8.  Transparency Of The Regulatory System 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
The fundamental instrument by which all of the emirates regulate 
business activity is the requirement that any place of business 
must acquire and maintain a proper license.  The procedures for 
obtaining a license vary from emirate to emirate, but are 
straightforward and publicly available. 
 
A license is not required unless a place of business is set up in 
the UAE.  In other words, foreign businesses exporting to the UAE 
but without a regular or continuing business presence in the UAE 
do not need a license. Licenses available include trade licenses, 
industrial licenses, service licenses, professional licenses, and 
construction licenses. 
 
Several federal regulations govern business activities in the UAE 
outside free trade zones.  Activities within the free zones are 
governed by special bylaws. 
 
The Federal Companies Law applies to all commercial companies 
established in the UAE and to branch offices of foreign companies 
operating in the UAE. The following provisions are of particular 
importance to foreign investors: 
Â¶A.  Companies established in the UAE are required to have a 
minimum of 51 percent UAE national ownership.  However, profits 
may be apportioned differently. 
 
Â¶B.  Branch offices of foreign companies are required to have a 
national agent unless the foreign company has established its 
office pursuant to an agreement with the federal or an emirate 
government. 
 
Â¶C.  All general partnership interest must be owned by UAE 
nationals. 
 
Â¶D.  Foreign shareholders may hold up to a 49 percent interest in 
limited liability companies. 
 
The Commercial Agencies Law requires that foreign principals 
distribute their products in the UAE only through exclusive 
commercial agents that are either UAE nationals or companies 
wholly owned by UAE nationals.  The foreign principal can appoint 
one agent for the entire UAE or for a particular emirate or group 
of emirates.  The law provides that an agent may be terminated 
only by mutual agreement of the foreign principal and the local 
agent, notwithstanding the expiration of the term of the agency 
agreement. 
 
The Federal Industry Law stipulates that industrial projects must 
have 51 percent UAE national ownership.  The law also requires 
that projects either be managed by a UAE national or have a board 
of directors with a majority of UAE nationals.  Exemptions from 
the law are provided for projects relating to extraction and 
refining of oil, natural gas, and other raw materials. 
Additionally, projects with a small capital investment or special 
projects governed by special laws or agreements are exempt from 
the industry law. 
 
The Government Tenders Law stipulates that a supplier, 
contractor, or tenderer with respect to federal projects must 
either be a UAE national or a company in which UAE nationals own 
at least 51 percent of the share capital.  Foreign companies 
wishing to bid for a federal project must, therefore, enter into 
a joint venture or agency arrangement with a UAE national or 
company.  Federal tenders must accompany a bid bond in the form 
of an unconditional bank guarantee for 5 percent of the value of 
the bid. 
 
13.a.9.  Efficient Capital Markets And Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
The UAE federal commercial code, promulgated in 1993, devotes an 
entire chapter to bankruptcy -- the first comprehensive 
legislation in the UAE on the subject.  Monetary judgments in 
bankruptcy cases are made in the local currency, and UAE courts 
enforce the judgments of foreign courts if there is reciprocity 
based on bilateral or international treaties.  In the judgment of 
Western legal experts, the commercial code chapter on bankruptcy 
governs the procedures and effects of bankruptcy in the UAE, but 
does not provide a mechanism for the orderly evaluation and 
distribution of assets of a bankrupt entity. 
 
Credit is allocated on market terms.  There are 21 UAE-owned 
banks with 344 branches in the UAE and abroad, 26 foreign banks 
with 109 branches, one restricted license bank, two investment 
banks, and 49 representative offices.  The Central Bank no longer 
issues licenses for new foreign banks to establish branches in 
the UAE.  Citibank is the only U.S. bank in the UAE that offers 
full banking services.  Bank of America has a representative 
office in Dubai, while Bank of New York has one in Abu Dhabi. 
The largest banks in terms of assets include the National Bank of 
Abu Dhabi, National Bank of Dubai, Emirates Bank International, 
Mashreqbank, and Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank. 
 
The Central Bank prohibits lending an amount greater than 7 
percent of a bank's capital base to any single customer.  Foreign 
banks with branches in the UAE are not permitted to calculate 
loans as a percentage of their global capital, which may however 
be used to calculate the capital adequacy ratio.  In a revision 
to the rule, the Central Bank in 1993 said it would exclude from 
the requirement non-funded exposures, such as letters of credit 
and guarantees.  The Central Bank also announced implementation 
of internationally recognized and accepted accounting principles. 
THE UAEG IMPLEMENTED A BODY OF ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING LEGISLATION 
AT THE END OF 2001, WHICH INCLUDED STRINGENT REPORTING 
REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRE TRANSFERS EXCEEDING USD $545 AND CURRENCY 
IMPORTATION/EXPORTATION OF AMOUNTS EXCEEDING APPROXIMATELY USD 
$13,700.  THE LAW IMPOSES STIFF CRIMINAL PENALTIES (JAIL TIME AND 
FINES) FOR MONEY LAUNDERING AND ALSO PROVIDES SAFE HARBOR 
PROVISIONS FOR THOSE WHO REPORT SUCH CRIMES.  BANKS AND OTHER 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ARE REQUIRED TO FOLLOW STRICT "KNOW YOUR 
CUSTOMER" GUIDELINES; ALL FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS MORE THAN USD 
$54,000, REGARDLESS OF THEIR NATURE, MUST BE REPORTED TO THE UAE 
CENTRAL BANK.  BANKS AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS SUPERVISED 
BY THE CENTRAL BANK (EXCHANGE HOUSES, INVESTMENT COMPANIES, AND 
BROKERAGES) ARE REQUIRED TO MAINTAIN RECORDS ON ALL TRANSACTIONS 
FOR AT LEAST FIVE YEARS. 
 
The UAE Central Bank established the Anti-Money Laundering and 
Suspicious Cases Unit (AMLSCU) in 1998 to perform the functions 
of a financial intelligence unit (FIU).  The AMLSCU joined the 
prestigious Egmont Group of FIUs -- the first Arab country to do 
so -- at the Group's June 2002 conference in Monaco.  This 
membership was the basis of a number of Memoranda Of 
Understanding the AMLSCU signed with other countries' FIUs in 
2002 to facilitate information sharing and case processing.  The 
AMLSCU participated in seminars, consultative meetings, and 
training with Washington-based agencies in 2002, including the 
Department of Treasury's FinCEN.  Banks, customs officials, and 
other relevant personnel are required to file suspicious 
transaction reports with the unit. 
 
Local banks finance most non-oil investment in the UAE.  Even so, 
banks lack sufficient lending opportunities in the UAE, and 
consequently place most of their funds in overseas markets.  Most 
of the manufacturing sector operates with higher levels of debt 
than prescribed by the 60:40 debt-to-equity ratio -- generally 
the norm for this sector.  Some three-fourths of gross fixed 
capital formation in manufacturing is directly or indirectly 
financed by the banking system. 
 
Abu Dhabi and Dubai each have a stock exchange, but only one 
stock currently is open to foreign investors, and it is capped at 
20 percent total foreign ownership.  Limited participation by 
foreigners in a few mutual funds is permitted. 
 
13.a.10.  Political Violence 
---------------------------- 
 
There have been no instances in recent memory involving 
politically motivated damage to projects, or insurgencies that 
have impacted the investment environment. 
 
13.a.11.  Corruption 
-------------------- 
 
As in many other countries, corruption is a concern for U.S. 
firms seeking to do business in the UAE.  American firms are 
bound by the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act -- a copy of which may 
be obtained from the Commercial Section of the U.S. Embassy. 
 
THERE IS NO EVIDENCE THAT CORRUPTION OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS IS A 
SYSTEMIC PROBLEM; HOWEVER, THE FORMER HEAD OF DUBAI CUSTOMS AND 
PORT AUTHORITY -- ALONG WITH FIVE OTHER CUSTOMS OFFICIALS -- WAS 
TRIED, CONVICTED, AND SENTENCED IN APRIL 2001 TO 27 YEARS IN 
PRISON ON CHARGES OF CORRUPTION AND EMBEZZLEMENT.  HE WAS 
PARDONED FOUR MONTHS LATER BY THE DUBAI GOVERNMENT AND RELEASED. 
 
13.a.11.b. Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------------------ 
 
The UAE has bilateral investment agreements with a number of 
countries, including the United Kingdom.  There is no bilateral 
investment treaty with the United States.  While the UAE has 
expressed general interest in discussing a bilateral investment 
treaty with the United States, the lack of national treatment for 
foreign investors has proven problematic, particularly with 
regard to foreign ownership. 
 
13.a.11.c.  OPIC And Other Investment Insurance Programs 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
The UAE has been suspended from U.S. OPIC insurance programs 
since 1995 because of the UAEG's lack of compliance with 
internationally recognized worker rights standards -- 
particularly laborers' rights to association and collective 
bargaining.  The ILO reported in April 2003, however, that the 
UAE had started projects to address these concerns, and this year 
drafted a labor law in consultation with the ILO that permits the 
creation of formal labor associations/unions. 
 
Workers currently address grievances and negotiate disputes or 
matters of interest with employers through formal and informal 
mechanisms, including strikes -- even though the law does not 
technically sanction them.  The UAEG does allow workers to 
associate freely for the advancement of common goals and 
interests. 
 
The UAEG prohibits strikes by those employed in the public sector 
on the grounds of national security considerations.  There is 
continuous coverage in the local press, however, of private 
sector employees striking in protest of non-payment of wages. 
Throughout 2002 and 2003, Ministry of Labor officials 
investigated and mediated such disputes -- often to the benefit 
of the striking workers -- and negotiated quick settlements. 
 
13.a.11.d.  Labor 
----------------- 
 
Population in the UAE is approaching 3.9 million, according to 
2002 data estimates.  More than 80 percent of residents are 
foreigners, and approximately 98 percent of private sector 
workers in the UAE are non-UAE nationals.  Emiratization of the 
UAE workforce remains a national objective, although mandated 
hiring of nationals has been limited to only a few sectors, such 
as banking. 
 
The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively 
 
The law does not specifically grant -- but does not prohibit -- 
workers the right to engage in collective bargaining.  It does, 
however, expressly authorize collective work dispute resolution. 
There were a number of organized gatherings of workers that 
complained of unpaid wages before the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Affairs in 2002.  Professional associations may raise work- 
related concerns, to lobby the UAEG for redress, or to file a 
grievance with the Government.  For the resolution of work- 
related disputes, workers rely on conciliation committees 
organized by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs or on 
special labor courts. 
 
Labor laws do not cover, and therefore do not protect, government 
employees, domestic servants, and agricultural workers.  The 
latter two groups face considerable difficulty in negotiating 
employment contracts because the mandatory requirements contained 
in the labor law do not apply.  They also face considerable 
difficulty in obtaining assistance to resolve disputes with their 
employers.  UAE employers generally tie an employee's residency 
or visa to his employment and sponsorship.  If the employee 
terminates his employment and is unable to secure new employment 
and a new sponsor, the employee loses residency and could be 
required to leave the country. 
 
Businesses in free trade zones must comply with federal labor 
laws; however, the Ministry of Labor does not regulate them. 
Instead, each free trade zone maintains its own labor department 
to address workers' concerns. 
 
Prohibition of Forced or Bonded Labor 
 
Forced or bonded labor is illegal in the UAE.  However, some 
employment agents bring foreign workers to the country under 
conditions approaching indenture.  Some women reportedly are 
brought to the country for service sector employment and later 
forced into prostitution.  The Government prohibits forced and 
bonded child labor and generally enforces this prohibition 
effectively.  In particular, the UAEG has taken concrete steps to 
resolve the problems of child camel jockeys. 
 
Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment 
 
The labor law prohibits employment of persons under the age of 15 
and has special provisions for employing those 15 to 18 years of 
age.  The Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs is 
responsible for enforcing the regulations.  Other regulations 
permit employers to employ only adult foreign workers.  The UAEG 
does not issue work permits for foreign workers under the age of 
18 years. 
 
In September 2002, the UAEG began implementing a child camel 
jockey ban with criminal penalties for violators up to and 
including imprisonment.  The ban prohibits the use of camel 
jockeys less than 15 years of age. 
 
Acceptable Conditions of Work 
 
There are a considerable number of skilled foreign nationals in 
the country who are employed under favorable working conditions. 
However, the country is also a destination for a large number of 
unskilled workers, including more than 200,000 domestic servants, 
most of them women from South and East Asia, and an even larger 
number of unskilled male workers, mostly from South Asia.  These 
unskilled laborers actively compete for jobs in the UAE, and some 
are subject to poor working conditions. 
 
The standard workday is eight hours per day; the standard 
workweek is six days per week; however, these standards are not 
enforced strictly.  Certain types of workers, notably domestic 
servants, are required to work longer than the mandated standard. 
The law also provides for a minimum of 24 days per year of annual 
leave plus 10 national and religious holidays.  There is no 
legislated or administrative minimum wage; rather, supply and 
demand determine compensation.  Compensation packages generally 
provide housing or housing allowances.  In addition, other 
benefits, such as homeward passage or health cards for minimal to 
no-cost health care, are often provided to employees by their 
employers.  The Labor and Social Affairs Ministry reviews labor 
contracts and does not approve any contract that stipulates a 
clearly unacceptable wage. 
The Ministries of Health and of Labor and Social Affairs, 
municipalities, and civil defense enforce health and safety 
standards, and the Government requires every large industrial 
concern to employ a certified occupational safety officer. 
Contrary to popular belief, there is no law in the country that 
prohibits labor outdoors when the temperature exceeds 50 degrees 
Celsius.  The law does require, however, that employers provide 
employees with a safe work environment. 
 
13.a.11.e.  Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
------------------------------------------ 
 
The UAE Free Zones today are home to approximately 5,000 
companies with a total investment estimated at more than USD $4 
billion.  Presently, 13 free trade zones operate in the UAE, and 
more are in the developmental stage.  Overall, these free zones 
form a vital component of the local economy, and serve as major 
re-export centers to the Gulf region. 
 
Since UAE tariffs are low and not levied against many imports, 
the chief attraction of the free zones is the waiver of the 
requirement for majority local ownership.  In the free zones, 
foreigners may own up to 100 percent of the equity in an 
enterprise.  All free zones provide 100 percent import and export 
tax exemption, 100 percent exemption from commercial levies, 100 
percent repatriation of capital and profits, multi-year leases, 
easy access to sea and airports, buildings for lease, energy 
connections (often at subsidized prices), and assistance in labor 
recruitment.  In addition, the free zone authorities provide 
significant support services, such as sponsorship, worker 
housing, dining facilities, recruitment, and security for a fee. 
 
By far the largest and most successful of the free zones is the 
Jebel Ali Free Zone (JAFZ) in Dubai, located 20 kilometers south 
of Dubai city adjacent to the Jebel Ali Port.  Over 2,200 
companies representing 80 countries have set up shop in the JAFZ, 
including numerous Fortune 500 firms. 
 
The JAFZ managing authority authorizes three types of licenses -- 
a general license, a specific license, and a national industrial 
license.  The licenses are valid while a company holds a current 
lease from the free zone authority and are renewable annually as 
long as the lease is in force.  The special license is issued to 
companies incorporated, or otherwise legally established, within 
the free zone or outside the UAE.  In such cases, no other 
license is required, and the ownership of the company may be 100 
percent foreign.  The license is issued for any activity 
permitted by the free zone authority, including manufacturing.  A 
company with a special license can operate only in the JAFZ or 
outside the UAE, but business can be undertaken and sales made in 
the UAE through or to a company holding a valid Dubai Economic 
Department license.  A company with a special license, however, 
can itself purchase goods or services from within the UAE. 
 
A variety of innovative free zones in Dubai have been established 
since 2000, most notably the TECOM (Technology, Electronic 
Commerce and Media) free zone.  TECOM houses both Internet City 
and Media City, two subdivisions which cater, respectively, to 
the IT and media sectors.  TECOM offers a high bandwidth, state- 
of-the-art IT infrastructure.  Current tenants of TECOM include 
prominent names such as Oracle, Reuters, CNN, Hewlett Packard and 
Microsoft.  Other Dubai free zones planned include Health Care 
City, specializing in medical products and services, and the 
Mohammed Bin Rashid Technology Park, which aims to promote 
scientific research and development, and to transfer technology 
throughout the region. 
 
13.a.11.f.  Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
The UAE Ministry of Planning reported that FDI inflows reached 
USD $16.4 billion in 2002.  Principal foreign investors to the 
UAE were from the United Kingdom, the United States, France, 
India, Japan, and Germany. 
The Abu Dhabi Chamber of Commerce and Industry notes that the 
leading sectors for investment in the UAE in 2002 were (in order 
of magnitude of investment): oil and gas-field machinery and 
services, power and water, computer/peripherals, medical 
equipment and supplies, airport development and ground equipment, 
telecommunications, and franchising. 
 
There are no restrictions or incentives with regard to the export 
of capital and outward direct investment, and UAE investment 
abroad is significant.  It is conservatively estimated that the 
Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA) manages an approximate USD 
$150 billion in government assets in overseas markets -- mostly 
in the United States, Europe, and Asia. 
 
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 
reports that net FDI flow for the UAE was $200 million during 
2000, and net negative flow of $156 million in 2001.  Official 
UAE statistics on FDI flows are not available. 
 
Wahba