This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 006907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2013 
TAGS: MARR MASS PREL
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 290725 
 
(U) Classified by CDA Lisa Kubiske for reason 1.5 (b/d). 
 
¶1. (C)  MFA Legal Adviser Jorge Santiago is waiting for 
comments on the Article 98 agreement from other government 
branches. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador, in conversations with President Mejia on 
November 22 and 24, stressed the urgency of the Dominican 
Republic's ratifying its signed ICC Article 98 bilateral 
agreement with the United States.  DCM Kubiske emphasized the 
same message during a courtesy call by Cesar Matias, 
chairperson of the Dominican Senate's External Relations 
Committee, on November 20.  DCM also raised the issue during 
the Ambassador's lunch for legislative leaders, including the 
presidents of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, for 
Treasury U/S Taylor on November 22.  Senate President Vasquez 
indicated willingness to move the measure forward once it is 
received from the Ministry. 
 
¶3. (C) Deputy Secretary of Foreign Relations Miguel Pichardo 
responded to presentation on November 28 by EcoPol counselor 
with an offer to have the MFA legal office advise the Embassy 
of the appropriate points of contact for other GODR agencies 
in this consultative process.  Pichardo will provide this 
information next week and emboffs will stress to those 
interlocutors the policy importance of the Article 98 
agreement. 
KUBISKE