This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001708 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2013 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT CASC CVIS IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: AMMAN SITREP 6 (3/22 0930 LOCAL) 
 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Doug Silliman. Reason 1.5 (b,d). 
 
---------------- 
General Overview 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (C)  Embassy Amman will remain on "standfast" through 
March 22. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Finance Minister Marto told us privately that plans 
were in the works to raise domestic gasoline and fuel oil 
prices.  The increase was included in the 2003 budget and an 
initial gasoline price increase of 25 fils/liter (13 
cents/gallon) was to have gone into effect on Friday, March 
¶21.  However, Marto said that King Abdullah decided the 
moment was not right politically.  Marto was confident, 
however, that prices for these products, as well as for 
kerosene and cooking gas, would be increased soon. 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (U)  No new issues to report.  The number of consular 
inquiries remains very small. 
 
---------------------- 
GOJ Actions/Statements 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  King Abdullah delivered an address on national TV at 
approximately 2000 local time March 21.  The King stressed 
the importance of "placing our national interest above all 
interests and considerations," and the primacy of maintaining 
Jordan's security and stability.  He stated that 
demonstrations in support of "the brotherly Iraqi people" 
should be "expressed in a civilized manner," and that such 
"expressions should reflect the true belonging to beloved 
Jordan."  The King ended his address by urging Jordanians to 
go to work and carry on with daily life, and with assurance 
that the GOJ was taking measures to ensure the continuity of 
normal daily life in Jordan. 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶5. (C) Embassy contacts reported media reports (Al Jazeera) 
that Jordanian Islamic activists are demanding that all 
Americans leave Jordan.  Embassy has been unable to confirm 
this story through local contacts. 
 
¶6. (C)  Embassy contacts reported at 2030 local time March 21 
that demonstrations were continuing in the southern Jordanian 
city of Ma'an.  According to these sources, one PSD officer 
was injured in the demonstrations.  Media reports of March 22 
indicated "spur of the moment" demonstrations were held March 
21 in various locations throughout the country, with some 
reportedly calling for "Arab armies" to come to the aid of 
Iraq and Saddam.  A Media report indicated that protesters 
demanded the expulsion of US troops and the US Ambassador at 
an unlicensed March 21 afternoon demonstration in downtown 
Amman. 
 
--------------------------- 
Refugee/Humanitarian Issues 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C)  IOM contacts reported at 2100 local time March 21 
that the Jordan-Iraq border remains open.  A total of 470 
TCN's have crossed into Jordan.  The majority are Sudanese; 
other nationalities include Egyptians, Yemenis, Somalis, 
Chadians and Eritreans.  IOM medical staff report that some 
arrivals suffer from respiratory infections and exhaustion. 
No Iraqi refugees/asylum seekers have yet attempted to enter 
Jordan.  An IOM charter flight with 140 Sudanese departed 
Amman for Khartoum at Midnight March 21.  Another 160 
Sudanese scheduled to depart the Ruweished camp told IOM 
officials they feared persecution if they returned home and 
asked to stay in the camp.  Negotiations between the group, 
Sudanese embassy officials, Jordanian authorities and 
concerned international agencies are continuing. 
 
----- 
Press 
----- 
 
¶8. (U)  No new issues to report. 
GNEHM