This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP AND OES 
STATE PASS EPA 
AMMAN FOR ENVIRONMENT HUB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EPET ALOW IZ KU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: THE WORD ON KUWAIT'S ENVIRONMENT 
 
REF: A. KUWAIT 00920 
     ¶B. KUWAIT 01021 
     ¶C. KUWAIT 1064 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: As US-led military action against Iraq moved into 
its sixth day, Kuwait stepped up measures to protect the 
environment from Iraqi retaliatory strikes.  Particular focus 
has been placed on monitoring the air and sea, as dark clouds 
from Iraqi oil fires continue to drift across the border into 
Kuwait.  In recent days the GOK launched a public relations 
campaign to assure its populace -- both remaining in Kuwait 
and temporarily outside the country -- that environmental 
conditions remain safe, despite troubling images seen in 
newspapers and on TV. 
 
DARK SKIES 
---------- 
¶2. On March 22, the GOK's Emergency Response Committee (ref 
A) held one of its regular meetings to discuss damage caused 
by oil fires burning in Iraq and other potential threats to 
Kuwait's environment.  The Committee draws together officials 
from several departments tasked with protecting the 
environment in the face of Iraqi aggression.  Environmental 
Public Authority (EPA) Chairman Dr. Mohammad Sarawi, who 
oversees the Committee, announced that the GOK was planning 
to open a mobile laboratory near its northern border to 
monitor the atmosphere for pollutants, in addition to the six 
fixed stations already operating throughout the country. 
 
¶3.  Dr. Sarawi told Econoff March 23 that he had been 
tracking with some concern the advance of large, black clouds 
entering Kuwait from Iraq.  Local press described the sky in 
Jahra, 12 miles north of Kuwait City, as being "very black 
and close to the ground, causing poor visibility."  Sarawi 
stressed that the clouds caused by Iraq setting fire to its 
own oil wells still did not pose any health hazards in Kuwait 
(ref B). 
 
¶4. Dr. Sarawi was hopeful that wind gusts expected later this 
week would drive out any pollutants, but acknowledged the 
threat of longer term effects to Kuwait's environment.  He 
said that a team of experts from Houston (Boots and Coots 
International Well Control), contracted by the USG to fight 
oil fires in southern Iraq, predicted it might take as long 
as 35-40 days to fully bring burning oil fields under 
control.  (See ref C for more information on fire fighting 
activities.) 
 
CLEAN WATER 
----------- 
¶5. Captain Ali Haider, Director of EPA's Marine Pollution 
Monitoring Department, told Econoff that his staff had not 
registered any oil spills in the Gulf.  Prior to the outbreak 
of fighting, the GOK had feared that Iraq might use oil as a 
weapon by dumping it into Kuwaiti waters.  Haider explained 
that any spill in the Gulf could take three to four days to 
reach the Sabiya station (just south of Bubiyan Island), 
where his staff was located, yet he was fairly confident 
there would be no spills now that coalition forces were 
securing Iraq's main ports. 
 
¶6. Haider was concerned, however, that oil particles from the 
Iraqi fires would stick to the sand and dust present in the 
Kuwaiti air following recent sand storms.  Weighted down from 
the oil, this debris might then drop into the Gulf, creating 
a situation similar to a limited oil slick.  Haider said his 
team was taking readings from the water to determine what 
clean-up procedures might need to be taken.  Divers were also 
investigating potential damage caused when an Iraqi missile 
struck the water near Kuwait's Shuaiba Port. 
 
¶7. Dr. Sarawi added that Kuwait's drinking water remained 
safe and free of pollutants.  Daily laboratory tests taken 
from ten locations revealed that the drinking water continued 
to meet international standards established by the World 
Health Organization, he said. 
 
 
GETTING THE WORD OUT 
-------------------- 
¶8. The Emergency Response Committee has begun a community 
outreach campaign to allay any fears people might have about 
environmental conditions.  As a counter to newspaper photos 
and TV images of Kuwait's darkened skies, Dr. Sarawi has 
conducted interviews with several major media outlets.  CNN 
has run on its "ticker tape" statements he made, while 
Kuwait's Arabic- and English-language newspapers have printed 
articles featuring Dr. Sarawi and other environmental 
experts. 
 
¶9.  Last week, Kuwait's EPA established an Internet website 
that enables concerned citizens to follow the air quality in 
six locations throughout the country.  The site 
(www.epa.org.kw) provides contact information and hourly 
reports on pollution levels for a variety of chemicals in the 
air.  It is rather simplistic, however, and somewhat 
confusing, as there is no explanation for viewers on the type 
or severity of pollutants listed.  (Note: Post suggested to 
the EPA that it consider expanding the site and making it 
more user-friendly. End Note.) 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶10.  Kuwaitis remember well the horrors of the environmental 
damage left by retreating Iraqi forces in 1991, including the 
burning of more than 700 oil wells that blackened the skies 
for seven months -- hence the front page attention given to 
Dr. Sarawi's statements.  Despite that disaster, Kuwaitis 
still do not have a great sense of responsibility for their 
environment, and we remain skeptical that the current crisis 
will change their attitudes.  Nonetheless, we might be able 
to use the present attention focused on the environment, 
coupled with the positive relationship being forged through 
USG-GOK cooperation on this issue, as a springboard toward 
encouraging vital environmental reforms in Kuwait once the 
conflict is over. 
JONES