This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001958 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO MOPS PGOV SNAR HO IZ
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF CJCS GENERAL RICHARD 
MYERS TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 18, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily "La Prensa" on 
8/16 entitled "A long promise".  "If we carefully read the 
statements of Richard Myers, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff during his visit to Tegucigalpa, he didn't mention how he 
will help Honduras in its fight against drug trafficking.  He 
simply stated that his government `will seriously consider' the 
possibility of sending military equipment to support the Honduran 
armed forces in the fight against this global threat, which 
definitely affects the U.S. more than any country." 
 
"When we hire a plumber to repair a water leak at home, the first 
thing he does is to close the main valve, then the secondary 
valves.  When we talk about drugs, we all know the main valve is 
located south of our continent, and the secondary ones are in 
Central America, that is used as a bridge to transport coke and 
heroin to the American market." 
 
"Why doesn't the U.S. government control this flow of drugs? 
Besides, drug traffickers evade the rigorous watch of U.S. 
authorities and maintain a great supply in the flourishing market 
of the Northern big cities." 
 
"In addition, there isn't serious control on money laundering 
coming from this illegal and dangerous activity.  Even though we 
see that some businesses grow in a surprising and enormous manner 
in front of our very eyes, there isn't real control on these 
activities." 
 
"Surely, the DEA should collaborate extensively with the Honduran 
authorities, but the lack of their support shouldn't be an excuse 
for our security forces to give up on this fight. or just join 
the drug trafficking party." 
 
Pierce