This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y////UPGRADED TO CONFIDENTIAL//// 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 04/04/2013 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC CVIS EFIN ETRD IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: AMMAN SITREP 27 (4/04 1000 LOCAL) 
 
REF: (A) FBIS GMP20030403000278 (B) FBIS 
 
     GMP20030403000277 (C) AMMAN 2029 
 
CLASSIFIED BY:DCM GREGORY L. BERRY, REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
---------------- 
General Overview 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Embassy is closed April 4 for the Jordanian 
weekend.  It will reopen for regular business on Sunday, 
April 6.  The movement of American staff remains restricted. 
 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (U) See information about AMCIT reporter in para 9 below. 
 
---------------------- 
GOJ Actions/Statements 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The official Petra news service reported that King 
Abdullah and Egyptian President Mubarak discussed the 
regional situation in a telephone call April 3.  According to 
the Petra account the two leaders "underlined the importance 
of searching for all means to stop the war as quickly as 
possible.  They also warned against the effects of this war 
on the innocent Iraqi civilians." (ref A) 
 
¶4. (U) The Government-affiliated Arabic daily Al-Rai gave 
extensive coverage in its April 3 edition to remarks made by 
PM Ali Abul Ragheb in an April 2 meeting with members of the 
Jordanian Senate and several ministers (ref B).  Stressing a 
message of national unity, Abul Ragheb stated that the 
current situation in the region "prompts us more than any 
time in the past to preserve the cohesion of our internal 
front.  Also, we must not allow any side to exploit these 
circumstances to practice oneupsmanship or cast doubt in our 
national and Pan-Arab stands." Rebutting recent criticisms of 
GOJ positions vis-a-vis Iraq, Abul Ragheb said "we welcome 
suggestions and ideas and advice, but oneupsmanship must not 
be practiced at the expense of the country.  We were accused 
of allowing U.S. troops to be stationed in Jordan to 
participate in the war against Iraq and this is absolutely 
untrue." 
 
¶5. (U) In the same press account of the meeting, the 
President of the Jordanian Senate, Zaid al-Rifai, echoed the 
PM's remarks stating "all of us highly commend His Majesty 
King Abdullah II's stands and appreciate the arduous efforts 
he made to prevent the war and his current intensive efforts 
to stop it . . . It is our joint responsibility to preserve 
the Kingdom and its security and stability under the 
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II." 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶6. (U) Nothing new to report -- we will report on likely 
weekend demonstrations in subsequent sitrep. 
 
------------------------------- 
Economic and Trade Developments 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Nothing new to report. 
 
--------------------------- 
Refugee/Humanitarian Issues 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Nothing new to report. 
 
----- 
Press 
----- 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:04/04/2013 
 
¶9. (C)  A crew from ABC Television planned to cross the 
Jordan-Iraq border on the morning of April 4, but apparently 
changed their minds after appraising the situation from the 
border.  Also on April 4, a four vehicle convoy consisting of 
foreign correspondents from CBS, London Times, Sky News, 
Portuguese TV, the Toronto Star, as well as two French 
freelancers and two South African journalists planned to 
enter Iraq via Jordan.  A second vehicle convoy of two to 
three vehicles from France's Channel two also reportedly 
departed Amman for the Iraqi border.  There are no AMCITS in 
either convoy. 
¶10. (C) On April 4, local media reported the April 3 meeting 
with Ambassador Gnehm and PM Abul Ragheb (ref C), with the 
Jordan Times calling it a "summons" in their headline.  The 
media drew largely from the Petra News Agency story.  The JT 
quoted the Ambassador, "we have differences of opinion from 
time to time, at the same time, we have some common views of 
things, and one of them is government of Jordan's desire to 
be very active and very much involved in the humanitarian 
effort for the Iraqi people."  Editorials surmised that the 
King's interview, followed by the PM's summons to the 
Ambassador, now makes clear the GOJ's position of solidarity 
with the Iraqi people.  The local media also reported April 4 
the King's telephone conversation with Mubarak (para 3). 
 
¶11.  (C) Al Destour led with a story on "27 Iraqi civilians 
killed and 193 wounded in airstrike," and ran a front-page 
picture of a young boy who had lost his arms.  Al-Rai 
reported Defense Secretary Rumsfeld's "latest warning" to 
Syria, and reported the Iraqi regime's "denial" of the 
coalition forces approach to Baghdad. 
GNEHM