P 301216Z DEC 03
FM AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5874
INFO AMEMBASSY ASMARA
AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI
AMEMBASSY LONDON
AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
AMEMBASSY PARIS
AMEMBASSY ROME
CJTF HOA
USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS  ADDIS ABABA 004636 
 
 
S/CT FOR REAP, AF/E - WOLNICK, AF/RSA, NEA/ARP, NEA/NGA, 
INR/AA - OFCANSKY, INR/TNC, EB/ESC/ESP-GLAS 
CORRECTED TO INCLUDE OMITTED INFO ADDRESSEES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL PINS ET
SUBJECT: ETHIOPIA: 2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 301352 
 
¶1.  This is post's submission for the 2003 Annual Terrorism 
Report.  Answers are keyed to questions in reftel. 
 
¶2.  Post Responses 
 
A) Significant actions taken by host government to support 
the Global Coalition Against Terrorism: The Government of the 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (GFDRE) is a firm and 
committed partner in the Global Coalition Against Terrorism 
and has not shied away from making public statements 
condemning terrorism to include providing full support to the 
U.S. policy on Iraq.  The GFDRE has cooperated in USG efforts 
to block any terrorist assets that might be in Ethiopia.  In 
fall 2003, the GFDRE created a committee to draft new 
counterterrorism legislation and expects to enact this new 
counterterrorism law by early 2004. 
 
B) Response of Judicial System: The GFDRE did not prosecute 
any incidents related to terrorism in 2003.  There were no 
acts of terrorism against U.S. citizens or facilities in 
Ethiopia in 2003. 
 
C) Extraditions:  The GFDRE did not extradite or request the 
extradition of suspected terrorists in 2003.  There were no 
USG requests to the GFDRE for extradition of suspected 
terrorists in 2003.  We believe Ethiopia would extradite 
suspected terrorists to the U.S. if requested, although we 
have no extradition treaty. 
 
D) Impediments to prosecution: There were no significant 
impediments to prosecution and/or extradition of suspected 
terrorists in Ethiopia in 2003.  However, the GFDRE's ability 
to respond effectively to terrorism is hampered by 
insufficient funding and inadequate training of its security 
forces and judiciary.  Criminal cases languish in the 
judicial system and suspects can spend years awaiting trial. 
 
E) Responses other than prosecution: The GFDRE has 
consistently condemned terrorism, including the 1998 Nairobi 
and Dar es Salaam bombings and the 9/11 attacks.  Prime 
Minister Meles Zenawi regularly condemns all forms of 
terrorism.  The GFDRE has taken actions to controls its 
border with Somalia to prevent smuggling and terrorist 
movement.  The GFDRE and the Government of Djibouti are 
discussing ways to reduce terrorists' ability to move across 
their border en route to and from Yemen and Somalia.  The 
GFDRE is cooperating with the Combined Joint Task Force-Horn 
of Africa (CJTF-HOA) in training to fight terrorism. 
Infantry forces from the U.S. Army's 10th Mountain Division, 
currently assigned to CJTF-HOA, have conducted three-month 
training sessions for elements of the Ethiopia National 
Defense Forces (ENDF) at the Hurso Camp in eastern Ethiopia 
in an effort to establish the first of three new 
anti-terrorism battalions in the ENDF.  Ethiopian Foreign 
Minister Seyoum stated during his address to the opening 
session of the UNGA in September 2003 that, "We in Ethiopia 
are determined to contribute more than our share to assist in 
the regeneration of our sub-region which has also been the 
target of international terrorism.  The achievement of peace 
and national reconciliation in Somalia is extremely critical 
in the fight against this scourge as well.  That is why all 
those who are willing to join in the fight against 
international terrorism should be automatically supportive of 
the peace effort by IGAD in Somalia."  Ethiopia and Yemen 
issued a joint statement on July 22 underlining the need "for 
great cooperation amongst countries in the region in the 
fight against this evil (terrorism)", and for an 
international conference on terrorism under the umbrella of 
the United Nations. 
 
F) Major counterterrorism efforts: There were no major 
counterterrorism efforts undertaken by the GFDRE in 2003. 
 
G) Support for terrorism: The GFDRE did not give any support 
to terrorism in any manner in 2003. 
 
H) Statements supporting terrorism: The GFDRE did not make 
any public statements in support of a terrorist-supporting 
country on a terrorism issue in 2003. 
 
I) Changes in attitude: There were no significant changes in 
the GFDRE's attitude toward terrorism in 2003. 
 
 
BRAZEAL