This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 003831 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, INR/NESA, INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR KU
SUBJECT: FINAL CABINET LISTING 
 
REF: KUWAIT 3141 
 
This message updates reftel and provides the complete listing 
of Kuwait's Cabinet in protocol order.  The Cabinet was 
officially formed July 14, 2003 with one exception:  the 
Minister of Social Affairs and Labor was appointed July 27, 
after reftel was transmitted. 
 
Prime Minister:  His Highness Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmed al-Jaber 
al-Sabah (First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister in 
the previous Cabinet) 
 
Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister:  His Excellency 
Shaykh Nawwaf al-Ahmed al-Jaber al-Sabah (not in previous 
Cabinet; was Deputy Commander of the National Guard) 
 
Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister:  His Excellency 
Shaykh Jaber Mubarak al-Hamad al-Sabah (no change) 
 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of State for Cabinet 
Affairs and Minister of State for National Assembly Affairs: 
His Excellency Mohammed Dhaifullah Sharar (no change) 
 
Minister of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs:  His Excellency 
Abdullah al-Matooq (not in previous Cabinet) 
 
Minister of Commerce and Industry:  His Excellency Abdullah 
Abdulrahman al-Taweel (not in previous Cabinet) 
 
Minister of Communications, Minister of Planning, Minister of 
State for Development of Administrative Affairs:  His 
Excellency Shaykh Ahmed Abdullah al-Ahmed al-Sabah (held the 
Communications portfolio in the previous Cabinet) 
 
Minister of Education and Minister of Higher Education:  His 
Excellency Dr. Rasheed Hamad al-Hamad (not in previous 
Cabinet) 
 
Minister of Energy (a new ministry, merging Ministry of Oil 
and Ministry of Electricity and Water):  His Excellency 
Shaykh Ahmed al-Fahd al-Ahmed al-Sabah (was Minister of 
Information and Acting Minister of Oil) 
 
Minister of Finance:  His Excellency Mahmoud al-Nouri (not in 
previous Cabinet) 
 
Minister of Social Affairs and Labor:  His Excellency Feisal 
al-Hajji (not in previous Cabinet; named July 27.  Graduate 
of Cairo University - Business Administration, 1968; former 
diplomat who rose to be Ambassador to Bahrain (1988-92); head 
of Kuwait Hotel Company. 
 
Minister of Health:  His Excellency Dr. Mohammed Ahmed 
al-Jarallah (no change) 
 
Minister of Information:  His Excellency Mohammed Abdullah 
Abulhassan (was UN PermRep) 
 
Minister of Foreign Affairs:  His Excellency Shaykh Dr. 
Mohammed Sabah al-Salem al-Sabah (was Minister of State for 
Foreign Affairs, Acting Finance Minister, and Acting Planning 
Minister in previous cabinet) 
 
Minister of Justice:  His Excellency Ahmed Yaqoub Baqer 
al-Abdullah (note:  name generally shown as Ahmed Baqer; held 
this post as well as Awqaf and Islamic Affairs in previous 
Cabinet; the only member of the current Cabinet who is also 
an elected member of the National Assembly) 
 
Minister of Public Works and Minister of State for Housing 
Affairs:  His Excellency Badr Nasser al-Humaidhi (not in 
previous Cabinet) 
URBANCIC