This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 000481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR OGC TUCKER ESKEW; DEPARTMENT FOR PA A/S 
BOUCHER FROM AMBASSADOR HULL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL IZ YM
SUBJECT: PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ON IRAQ: YEMENI IDEAS 
 
¶1. (SBU) I spent two days this week in Aden publicizing U.S. 
development and security projects to remind the Yemeni 
government and public of their stake in our bilateral 
relationship as we move toward conflict in Iraq.  One of my 
more interesting encounters was with the editors of Al Ayyam 
newspaper, an independent with the country's largest 
circulation. 
 
¶2. (SBU) During my visit, Al Ayyam not only featured U.S. 
development and security projects, but also showcased an 
interview with me that allowed me to put US-Iraqi policy in 
the best possible light.  I was surprised to find the 
newspaper's leadership strongly supportive of the US 
commitment to removing Saddam Hussein and allowing the Iraqi 
people to develop a democracy. 
 
¶3. (SBU) As we discussed the probable conflict, Al Ayyam's 
editors had some pointed suggestions for cushioning the 
impact on Yemenis and other Arabs.  They recalled photos of 
American Muslim GI's cleaning a mosque in Afghanistan and 
then praying in it.  They also recalled a photo of American 
Muslim soldiers praying on an aircraft carrier.  Both images, 
they said, sent strongly positive images to Muslims.  They 
also welcome President Bush's continuing expressions of 
respect for Islam, e.g., visits to Islamic centers, meetings 
with American Muslims, messages on Islamic occasions.  A 
third suggestion they made was to emphasize the positive 
effects of previous US military interventions in Kosovo and 
in Afghanistan on the daily lives of Muslims in those 
countries.  Our message: in Iraq, as in Kosovo and 
Afghanistan, Muslims can look forward to better lives as a 
result of US intervention. 
 
¶4. (SBU) I very much appreciated an opportunity to meet with 
you during the recent NEA Chief of Mission conference and 
hope the above thoughts are helpful to you as we explain our 
intervention in Iraq. 
HULL