This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 004540 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/18/2013 
TAGS: IZ PREL TU
SUBJECT: MFA DENIES VISA TO THE IRAQI AMBASSADOR IN THE PRC 
 
REF: SECSTATE 102827 
 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (U) Action request at para 4. 
 
 
¶2. (C) In a meeting between the DCM and Tahsin Burcuoglu 
(Director-General for Middle East, OIC, and North Africa 
Affairs at the MFA) on July 18, Burcuoglu noted that the MFA 
had recently instructed the Turkish embassy in Beijing to 
deny a visa to the Iraqi Ambassador to the PRC (Muwaffaq 
Muhammad Jasem Al-Ani Al-Tikriti). This was on the basis of a 
request from the USG (reftel) to deny safehaven, asylum, or 
assistance in leaving or entering Turkey to a specific group 
of individuals within the leadership of the former Iraqi 
regime (other issues discussed in the meeting reported 
septel). 
 
 
¶3. (C) Burcuoglu noted that, even though Al-Tikriti's stated 
intentions were to return to Baghdad through Turkey with his 
family, the MFA would continue to deny him a visa. However, 
Burcuoglu also asked if the USG had made any "updates" to the 
aforementioned list of individuals. Specifically, if 
Al-Tikriti is now off the list for any reason, the GOT would 
like to know. The DCM thanked Burcuoglu for the GOT's 
assistance in this matter, and promised to ask for guidance 
on USG interest in Al-Tikriti's whereabouts and plans. 
 
 
¶4. (C) ACTION REQUEST: Please advise if there is any update 
regarding USG interest in Al-Tikriti. 
PEARSON