This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR ETRD ECON
SUBJECT: MFA MINISTER OF STATE ON TRADE AND LIBERIA 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1503 
     ¶B. STATE 250578 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY DCM RICK ROBERTS FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) AND (d). 
 
 
¶1. (U) When then CDA Roberts delivered the Najaf demarche 
(REF B) to MFA Minister of State Samaila on September 2, the 
MinState raised agricultural subsidies and Liberia.  The 
Najaf part of the conversation was reported Ref A. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
U.S./EU AGRICULTURAL SUBSIDIES IMPEDE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
¶2. (C) Somaila emphasized that U.S. and European agricultural 
subsidies posed a major obstacle to development in 
Sub-Saharan Africa.  Noting that 80 percent of Sub-Saharan 
Africans worked in agriculture, he suggested that instead of 
spending billions of dollars per year on agricultural 
subsidies, the U.S. and Europe should commit those funds to 
combating poverty and disease in Africa.  Samaila said the 
GON was committed to taking advantage of the African Growth 
and Opportunity Act (AGOA) to increase agricultural exports, 
and was working to comply with AGOA regulations.  But 
continuing U.S. and EU subsidies made those exports 
uncompetitive, even under AGOA. 
 
 
------- 
LIBERIA 
------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Samaila said the GON was committed to staying the 
course in Liberia.  Repeating a refrain we have heard from 
President Obasanjo, Samaila said a peaceful and stable 
Liberia was the key to the maintenance of peace and stability 
in West Africa.  While Liberia was a top GON priority, 
Nigeria would need the continued assistance of the U.S. and 
the international community to bring order to Liberia and to 
better the lives of its people.  Samaila added that Nigeria 
was disappointed that the U.S. forces were not more involved 
onshore in Liberia, believing that U.S. forces would join 
ECOWAS in the PKO once Charles Taylor departed Liberia. 
 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT: Samaila's expectation of U.S. military 
involvement in the Liberian PKO is not uncommon.  Prior to 
Taylor's departure, many Nigerians believed that only direct 
U.S. intervention could settle the conflict between the GOL, 
LURD and MODEL, as well as address humanitarian needs in and 
around Monrovia.  With Taylor's departure and Nigerian-led 
ECOWAS forces in position, most Nigerians now see the 
situation improving but will continue to be wary of West 
African nations' ability to maintain the peace without the 
financial, logistical, and if need be, military support from 
the U.S. and the international community until the PKO 
becomes a UN operation. 
MEECE