This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, DS/DSS/ITA, AND DS/OP/EAP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ASEC IZ VM
SUBJECT:  PRO-PEACE RALLY AT EMBASSY 
 
REF:  HANOI 0651 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1.  (U)  During the afternoon of March 19, a group of 
approximately 30 school-age children (apparently in their 
early teens at the oldest) suddenly appeared at the front of 
the Chancery chanting -- in English -- "peace for Iraq" and 
"no war," and holding up a few pro-peace posters (also in 
English).  One student presented one poster subsequently to 
RSO, and expressed Vietnam's wish for peace in light of its 
own experiences with war.  According to some in the crowd, 
the demonstrators were all students at Ngo Si Lien School. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Within a few minutes of the beginning of the 
demonstration, several dozen additional local police arrived 
on the scene and moved the protesters to the sidewalk across 
the street from the Embassy.  They did not otherwise try to 
break up the demonstration and instead stood facing them, 
and helping to direct traffic.  Crowds of onlookers quickly 
outnumbered the students but did not join in the chanting. 
A few passers-by on motorcycle raised their fists when they 
saw the demonstrators, apparently in support. 
 
¶3.  (U)  One older man, apparently not connected with the 
students and apparently drunk or on drugs, took off his 
shirt, cut himself, and tried to spread his blood on shrubs 
and the ground.  Police restrained him and eventually took 
him into custody. 
 
¶4.  (U)  The student protesters remained on the scene for 
about one hour.  As far as Embassy knows, none were detained 
or taken into custody.  Several photographers, both still 
and videocam, covered the protest.  Embassy expects press 
coverage on the evening television news March 19 and in 
newspapers on March 20. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Comment:  Unlike the well-staged "mass" rallies and 
demonstrations (ref), this event appears to have been 
slightly more spontaneous (even if still orchestrated by 
school teachers and authorities) than the norm for Vietnam. 
We expect the number and intensity of these protests to grow 
as military action against Iraq grows more imminent and 
after the offset of any hostilities.  We continue to expect 
that Vietnamese security officials will keep these 
demonstrations well under control, however. 
BURGHARDT