This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 006960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ETRD PHUM KDEM IZ JO
SUBJECT: PM FAYEZ PLANS "CONTROLLED" POLITICAL 
LIBERALIZATION, IMPROVED RELATIONS WITH THE GULF 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  New PM Faisal al-Fayez told the Ambassador October 
28 that he hopes to implement needed but "controlled" 
political reforms, reaching out to political parties 
(including Islamists), NGOs and communities in the process. 
He sees great economic challenges, especially in controlling 
the budget deficit, but hopes to work with Saudi Arabia and 
Kuwait for assistance.  The Ambassador reviewed Jordan's 
cooperation with the new Iraqi government, the U.S.-Jordan 
extradition treaty, and human rights issues.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------- 
"CONTROLLED" POLITICAL LIBERALIZATION 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  A very relaxed, comfortable and jovial Prime 
Minister Faisal al-Fayez received the Ambassador and DCM in 
his new office October 28.  Fayez said he is aware of the 
problems facing him and his government, but cited his direct 
relationship with King Abdullah as an important asset. 
Queried by the Ambassador about the new government's 
rhetorical focus on political reform, Fayez expressed his 
intention to proceed with "controlled" political 
liberalization through measured steps.  It was imperative, he 
argued, that Jordan open up politically, but it was also 
imperative to move gradually to maintain stability.  Fayez 
said he intended to open a dialogue with all factions of 
society -- political parties (including the Muslim 
Brotherhood/Islamic Action Front), members of Parliament, 
pressure groups, and communities.  Fayez agreed that there is 
a particular need to strengthen NGOs and other independent 
institutions, saying that this is precisely why the King had 
chosen lawyer/women's activist Asma Khader as spokesperson 
for the government. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
ECONOMIC CHALLENGES?  LOOK TO THE GULF 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  Fayez smilingly listed off the economic challenges 
he faces, especially the need to increase revenues and lower 
the budget deficit.  He said he planned to travel to Saudi 
Arabia soon to seek an extension for one year of the current 
deal which supplies Jordan 50,000 bbls/day of Saudi crude 
free of charge.  Fayez said he and his father have had 
historically good relations with the al-Saud, particularly 
Riyadh Governor Prince Salman.  Fayez also expressed a desire 
to travel to Kuwait, saying that members of the Kuwaiti 
parliament, not the government, were the obstacle to improved 
bilateral ties (Comment:  and, presumably, increased Kuwaiti 
assistance as well.  End Comment).  He thought he could open 
a dialogue with those Kuwaitis who are hostile to Jordan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
IRAQ ASSETS, EXTRADITION TREATY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  The Ambassador reviewed for Fayez the extensive 
cooperation between Jordan and the new Iraqi 
government/Coalition Provisional Authority.  Fayez was 
supportive of continued Jordanian engagement with Iraq.  The 
Ambassador laid out the state of play on Iraqi assets and the 
status of the refugee camps at Ruwaished and in No Man's Land 
on the Jordan-Iraq border.  He told Fayez he had asked former 
PM Abul Ragheb to present the U.S.-Jordan bilateral 
extradition treaty to Parliament, and asked Fayez to do the 
same.  He also raised a prominent human rights case.  Fayez 
professed ignorance about the specifics of these issues based 
on his newness in office, but promised to follow up . 
 
¶5.  (U)  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM