This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007626 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2013 
TAGS: IS KPAL PREL TU
SUBJECT: CHALLENGE TO CREDENTIALS REPORT:  TURKEY DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. STATE 339919 
     ¶B. STATE 325119 
 
 
(U) Classified by Political Counselor John Kunstadter, E.O. 
12958, reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) We delivered ref A demarche to MFA Middle East 
Department Head Kemal Tuzun on December 12, stressing that 
this credentails challenge threatened to invite further 
attempts to bring territorial disputes to the credentialing 
process, turning a routine procedure into political 
wrangling, and that there were many other fora where these 
territorial issues could be raised.  Tuzun said he would 
communicate our demarche to Turkey's UN delegation, noting 
our concerns about this misuse of the credentialing process. 
Tuzun strongly recommended that the USDEL raise this directly 
with the Turkish delegation as well.  He declined to predict 
how Turkey would vote. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Tuzun also raised the subject of Turkey's vote in 
support of seeking an opinion from the International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) about the legality of the Israeli separation 
barrier (ref B).  Tuzun argued that the Turkish Permrep's 
explanation of vote, which he said strongly condemned 
terrorism, was more important than the vote itself.  We urged 
Tuzun to stress the GOT's anti-terror message bilaterally to 
the Palestinians and other regional countries as well. 
EDELMAN