This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001525 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/EX, CA, PA, INR AND S/ES/O/CMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT CASC CVIS IZ JO
SUBJECT: EMBASSY AMMAN TO FORM CRISIS LIAISON UNIT IF/WHEN 
HOSTILITIES COMMENCE 
 
¶1. (SBU) In the event that war begins with Iraq, Embassy 
Amman will stand up a Crisis Liaison Unit (CLU) that will 
serve as the Embassy's central point of contact/clearinghouse 
for DoS inquiries on all crisis-related issues.  Inquiries 
from the Ops Center and associated DoS Task Forces should 
come through the CLU and -- similarly -- Embassy-generated 
responses should be sent out via the CLU.  The goal is to 
ensure that, as issues arise, we provide one definitive 
answer to the Department (rather than multiple, possibly 
conflicting, answers from different offices).  As currently 
envisioned, the CLU will be staffed 24-hours a day by three 
officers and one OMS per shift during the first few days 
after war begins.  Following this initial period, we will 
assess staffing levels and -- depending on the actual flow of 
work -- make necessary adjustments. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  When contacted by the Department on a particular 
subject, the CLU will contact the Mission office that is 
expert in that issue.  Once it has gathered the information 
necessary to respond to the inquiry, the CLU will communicate 
back to the Department -- either orally on an open or STU-III 
line, or in writing via e-mail (SBU or Classified) or SITREP. 
 The CLU will draft regular SITREPS to the Department 
summarizing all important crisis-related developments and 
also keep a log of its actions. 
 
¶3. (SBU) It is important to be clear that public or press 
inquiries should not be directed to the CLU during regular 
working hours.  The Embassy Switchboard Operator will be 
instructed to direct such inquires to the Consular Section 
(for Consular matters), RSO (for Security questions) and PA 
(Press).  If such calls come into the CLU during regular 
hours, they will be directed to the appropriate office. 
Outside of regular Embassy hours, all crisis-related calls 
will be directed to the CLU. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
CLU PHONE/FAX NUMBERS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Department should utilize the following numbers 
when contacting the CLU. 
 
STU-III:  962-6-592-7740 
 
Unclassified lines: 962-6-592-0101 ext. 2366 or ext 2599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Unclassified FAX: 962-6-592-0159 
 
SIPDIS 
 
--------- 
E-Mail 
--------- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The CLU has a dedicated E-mail Address on both the 
Classified and SBU computer Systems.  On the classified 
system, the address that appears in the Global Address List 
is "Amman-MSX-Crisis Liaison Unit."  On the Unclassified 
system, the CLU's address in the Global Address List is 
"Amman Crisis Liaison Unit." 
 
¶6. (SBU) Please note that we will only start using the above 
listed phone numbers and e-mail addresses if/when war 
commences and the CLU is stood up. 
 
GNEHM