This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002984 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY AND IDEF: SUPPORT FOR STRONG DOD ATTENDANCE 
 
¶1. The Embassy supports and encourages direct senior-level 
Department of Defense participation in the sixth 
International Defense Industry, Aerospace and Maritime Fair 
(IDEF) that will be held in Ankara, Turkey, September 
30-October 3, 2003. 
 
 
¶2. Given the current economic situation in Turkey and the 
importance Turkey attaches to participation in IDEF as a sign 
of a country's commitment to a successful business 
partnership, it is important for the Department of Defense to 
be represented at this year's IDEF at an appropriate senior 
level.  Countries whose firms often compete with American 
firms for major contracts here (e.g. Israel, France, Russia) 
are expected to continue their practice of sending senior 
defense officials.  A strong DOD presence will demonstrate 
(to both the Turks and American business) strong US backing 
for American business opportunities in Turkey, and our 
understanding of the important contributions that industrial 
cooperation can have on the overall relationship.  Strong DOD 
attendance will also continue to support Alliance 
interoperability and DCI goals.  Conversely, a poor DOD 
showing could impact negatively future business opportunities 
for American firms here.  Finally, the Foreign Commercial 
Service (FCS) is recruiting new-to-markets firms to exhibit 
their products at the USA pavilion.  High-level USG presence 
would be welcome support for these firms. 
PEARSON