This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002545 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, PM, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER MOPS SNAR KJUS PHUM PINR HO KCUM
SUBJECT: THOUSANDS OF ILLEGAL ARMS STILL UNCOUNTED FOR IN 
HONDURAS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1740 
 
¶1.  It is estimated that around 10,000 AK-47's, remnants of 
the region's civil wars in the 1980's, remain on the streets 
of Honduras.  A recent legislative decree offered USD 57 for 
each gun deemed "illegal", but the 90-day grace period for 
voluntarily turning in these weapons has now expired. During 
this period, approximately 1,300 weapons were turned over to 
various police stations throughout the country. 
 
¶2.  Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez stated that the 
GOH is well aware of the threat these weapons pose for 
Honduran security, and the danger that they could be bartered 
for drugs with Colombian narcoterrorist groups.  As such, 
Alvarez announced planned operations to raid and arrest those 
who possess these weapons.  The penalty for possession of an 
illegal weapon will be 8 to 10 years in prison and a fine of 
USD 285 to 570 for each weapon.  The Minister also announced 
that this law will be enforced equally, regardless of factors 
such as socioeconomic standing or political affiliation. 
 
¶3.  As stated in reftel, the following arms are prohibited by 
the GOH: all types of AK-47's; Livian and other heavy 
automatic weapons with a caliber of 7.62 x 55mm; all types of 
Uzi machine guns; all types of M-16's; M-60 machine guns; 
guns used by snipers with a caliber of 5.56 mm; Galil's; 
G-3's; all types of Berettas 5.56; and M-21's used by snipers. 
Palmer