This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR UNESCO PARIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IO SENV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY SEEKS SUPPORT FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE 
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC 
COMMISSION 
 
REF: MFA DIP NOTE 2003/CKGY/132186 
 
 
Following is the text of diplomatic note number 132186 
received by the Embassy on April 14, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
Begin Text: 
 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America has has the honour to inform the Latter that the 
Turkish Govrnment has decided to present its candidature for 
the membership of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC) Executive Council at the elections to be 
held during the 22nd session of the IOC Assembly that will 
take place on 24 June - 4 July 2003, at UNESCO Headquarters 
Paris. 
 
 
Turkey surrounded by three major seas is deeply interested in 
research and develpoments related to marine research 
sciences. As such it has always actively participated in the 
work of various different international organizations 
competent in this field.  Futhermore Turkey firmly believes 
in the promotion of international cooperation in 
oceanographiic matters. 
 
 
The Turkish Governemnt would highly aappreciate the valuable 
support of the Government of the United States of America for 
its candidature to be able to work more effectively for the 
realization of the objectives of the IOC. 
 
 
The Ministry of the Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurance of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
 
 
End Text. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PEARSON