This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 002775 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR L/UNA AND EB/ESC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ JO UNSC
SUBJECT: IRAQ SANCTIONS IMPLEMENTATION UNDER JORDANIAN LAW 
 
REF: STATE 123640 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Doug Silliman, reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
Â¶1.  (c)  Embassy has consulted with Trade Ministry and 
Foreign Ministry officials to obtain answers to reftel 
questions regarding sanctions implementation.  Answers keyed 
to reftel questions: 
 
--  UNSCR 661 was implemented in Jordan by Prime Ministerial 
decree.  Within the context of the sanctions regime, Jordan 
has maintained a trade relationship with Iraq throughout the 
sanctions period.  Jordan has exported to Iraq since 1991 
through the OFF program, through small-scale private 
sector-to-private sector trade (primarily in agricultural 
products and detergents), and through a bilateral oil and 
trade protocol under which Jordan imported free and 
subsidized oil from Iraq in return for a similar value of 
commercial goods.  Jordan also imported small volumes of 
agricultural products (primarily barley) from private 
traders, and imported sulfur on a government-to-government 
basis during the sanctions period.  The U.N. "took note" of 
the oil and trade protocols in its resolutions establishing 
sanctions on Iraq. 
 
--  Domestic measures to implement sanctions resolutions 
consist of the aforementioned Prime Ministerial decree, and 
could be reversed relatively easily.  The PM would issue a 
decree voiding trade restrictions.  Such decrees implementing 
UNSCR's are normal procedure for the GOJ, and would likely be 
issued in a matter of days at most, according to our contacts. 
 
--  Since a decree was needed to operationalize the UNSCR 
imposing sanctions, a second decree would be necessary to 
operationalize any new UNSCR lifting sanctions - the 
resolution would not in itself be sufficient to begin 
large-scale imports of Iraqi products.  However, in light of 
past behavior noted above, import of Iraqi goods prior to 
issuance of such a decree would probably be tolerated. 
 
--  As noted above, a decree reversing sanctions could be 
issued "virtually overnight" if the cabinet so chose. 
 
--  Not applicable. 
GNEHM