This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
JUNE 03, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for June 03, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2.  Radikal:  PKK-KADEK militants ambushed a 
jandarma team patrolling in rural Eruh of Siirt 
the previous night. As a result of ensuing 
clashes, three soldiers were wounded while one 
PKK-KADEK militant was killed. The jandarma 
undertook a large-scale operation in the region. 
 
 
¶3.  Milli Gazete/Hurriyet/Milliyet/Turkiye: 
Bingol Governor Huseyin Avni Cos announced at a 
press meeting that seven of eight persons 
detained on charges of "assisting and harboring 
the PKK/KADEK terror organization" were ordered 
held by the court. Governor Cos reminded that 
PKK/KADEK militants had opened gunfire on a 
military vehicle on patrol in Bingol and had 
wounded eight soldiers. Cos said one PKK militant 
was killed in the ensuing clashes, but his corpse 
was taken by the militants. Governor Cos said, as 
a result of large-scale operations by the 
security forces in the region, eight suspects, 
including two village headmen, were arrested. 
Milliyet reported that security forces launching 
an operation in Kocbas village in Diyarbakir had 
seized one rocket launcher and one hand-grenade 
that belonged to PKK/KADEK organization. 
 
 
 
 
¶4.  Milli Gazete: Police teams from Smuggling and 
Organized Crimes Department of Diyarbakir's 
Security Directorate seized nine kilos of heroin 
in Diyarbakir. In connection with the drugs, two 
persons were ordered held by the court while the 
police undertook a large-scale investigation. 
 
 
¶5.  Bolge: Based upon a tip, jandarma teams from 
Gaziantep seized assorted quantities of hemp in 
Sehitkamil and Nizip districts. While the hemp 
was burned, jandarma detained four suspects. 
 
 
¶6.  Evrensel: A picnic organized by Democratic 
Students Movement from Inonu University of 
Malatya was thwarted by jandarma. Jandarma from 
Akcadag Jandarma Command searched students coming 
to the picnic area in Sultansuyu. The jandarma 
had obtained a warrant of search from the court 
prior the students' arrival at the picnic ground. 
They detained one student and seized the books 
the students had brought in order to sell. Three 
students were wounded as they tried to prevent a 
colleague from being arrested. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
¶7.  Sabah: As the peshmergain Northern Iraq 
increased the dinar's rate of exchange against 
the USD arbitrarily, truckers carrying goods from 
Turkey to Iraq went on a strike for three days. 
The truckers started carrying goods to Iraq again 
only after the authorities resolved the issue. 
The ROE was 20 Iraqi dinars to USD 1.00 until a 
week ago, but because of a vacuum of authority, 
the peshmerga charged 3.50 Iraqi dinars to USD 
1.00. As a result of the arbitrary application, 
the Iraqis increased the transit fee to 120 US 
dollars. After the truckers' strike, the transit 
fee was dropped to 20 US dollars. Sirnak Deputy 
Governor Resul Celik said only Turkish truckers 
passing from Habur border gate were exposed to 
such an application which aimed to make the trade 
from Turkey difficult. 
HOLTZ