This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON ETRD HO
SUBJECT:  WIRELESS INTERNET SURVEY: HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 85946 
 
¶1. In response to reftel request, Post provides the 
following information regarding the use of Wireless 
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) technologies in Honduras. 
 
¶2. According to the National Telecommunications 
Commission (Conatel), Honduras has not yet allocated 
any unlicensed radio-frequency spectrum for use by Wi- 
Fi and similar wireless technologies.  Equipment 
utilizing broadband spectrum technologies, such as Wi- 
Fi, are subject to a general license granted through 
Conatel's resolution NR016/00.  Honduran telecom norm 
does not make any distinction between indoor and 
outdoor use for radio-frequency allocations.  Effective 
radiated power radio-frequency devices, with a rate 
equal or less than 10 milliwatts, are subject to a 
general license allowing them to operate freely. 
 
¶3. In Honduras, Wi-Fi systems can be used without a 
license, as equipment utilizing broadband spectrum 
technologies are only subject to a general license, 
granted through Conatel's resolution NR016/00. 
 
¶4. Wi-Fi systems can be used for commercial purposes as 
long as the operator has an exploitation permit for 
public use. 
 
¶5. At present, there are no commercial Wi-Fi networks 
that provide service to the public operating in 
Honduras.  In the event that Wi Fi systems are used, 
these would only be allowed for data transmission 
operations connected via satellite or cable TV 
networks. 
 
Pierce