This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001306 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR OES/SAT, OES/STC, OES/ENV, OES/PCI 
(MCGUIRE), OES/STAS (REYNOLDS), WHA/CAN, 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR OSTP (HALL) 
 
DOE FOR OFFICE OF FUSION ENERGY SCIENCES (SC-50) 
ROBERTS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL TNGD ENRG EINV CA
SUBJECT: Still no details on revised Canadian ITER bid 
 
 
¶1.  In December 2002 during the 7th ITER Negotiations 
meeting in Barcelona, the Canadian delegation announced 
that in light of the competing proposals made by the 
European Union and Japan to host ITER, it would 
reassess its offer with a view to indicating a revised 
position early in 2003. 
 
¶2.  The Canadian delegation had noted specifically 
that, "the Canadian offer to host had a diminished 
chance of success given current developments in the 
negotiations unless the Government of Canada agreed to 
participate financially in the project."  At that time 
the Canadian negotiators anticipated a revised offer by 
the end of March 2003.  As of early May, however, no 
announcement has been made. 
 
¶3.  To determine when Canada's revised plan might be 
available Emboff spoke with officials at the Department 
of Natural Resources (NRCan) and Department of Foreign 
Affairs (DFAIT). 
 
¶4.  Serge Bernier, Senior Policy Analyst in the 
Economic and Fiscal Analysis Division at NRCan told 
Emboff that NRCan Minister Dhaliwal has discussed ITER 
with his federal cabinet colleagues and is presently 
leading discussions with senior ministers of the 
Ontario provincial government about the ITER bid. 
Details regarding the discussion are however, lacking. 
(It should be noted that Jim Campbell of NRCan, who was 
Canada's head of delegation to ITER negotiating 
meetings, retired from government service at the end or 
April.  Bernier is now acting in his stead, although we 
understand that Campbell may well continue to attend 
ITER meetings as a contract employee of NRCan.) 
 
¶5.  Dave Church, Senior Policy Advisor with the Science 
and Technology Division at DFAIT told us that he 
anticipates details of Canada's renewed bid will be 
made public at the June 19th "P-1" meeting. 
 
¶6. Comment: Although Church and Bernier appear hopeful 
that Canada will present a new and attractive bid, 
Church acknowledged that the European Union and Japan 
are many laps ahead in the race to host ITER, while 
Canada's bid remains in the pits for an overhaul.  To 
overtake the other proposals and become a front-runner 
Canada's bid would have to include significantly 
greater federal commitment and a federal investment far 
larger than the C$3million the GoC provided in 2000. 
Our perception is that achieving these objectives will 
be difficult, at best.  End comment. 
 
 
CELLUCCI