This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001018 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID  DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: SITREP NO. 5 
 
REF: KUWAIT 1013 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 5 AS OF 1159 HOURS LOCAL, 0359 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME MARCH 21. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP (all reported times are 
Kuwait Local, GMT plus three): 
 
----------------- 
Security/Military 
----------------- 
 
In the past twelve hours, we have had four duck-and- 
cover alerts in response to reported launches of 
surface-to-surface missiles from Iraq.  The most recent 
was at approximately 9:25 a.m.  No/no reports of damage 
or casualties, nor any indication of chemical or 
biological warheads. 
s. 
 
 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
 
We facilitated MFA authorization for the Kuwaiti Embassy 
in Washington to issue a visa to an Iraqi national hired 
by VOA/ORHA who needed to travel urgently. 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
 
Some of the stranded Amcit passengers reported earlier 
have departed to Dubai on Kuwait Airways, which will 
arrange for them to go to Chicago; others are leaving at 
noon for London, also on Kuwait Airways. 
 
A Consular officer and FSN are driving to the Saudi 
border at Nuweisib (southeastern corner of Kuwait) today 
to meet with the team from Congen Dhahran and with 
Kuwaiti border officials. 
 
The Saudi Embassy here is open and accepting visa 
applications even today Friday (local weekend), clearly 
preferring this to issuing emergency visas at the border. 
We know of no/no Amcits at the border in need of help. 
 
Of the 23 persons (Amcits and their family-members) 
mentioned in the last Sitrep who had contacted the 
Embassy to request assistance departing Kuwait, only two 
(Amcits both) are still pending departure. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
We clarified to TFIZ01 and NEA/ARP a CNN report that 
Kuwait City International Airport had suspended 
operations.  The airport remains operational, with at 
least Kuwait Airways continuing to fly.  (The reported 
suspension was merely momentary, in response to an air- 
raid siren.) 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: See above. 
 
JONES