This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 001674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2013 
TAGS: PREL ASEC IZ RS YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: IRAQI EDUCATORS IN MOSCOW REQUEST RESIDENCE 
PERMITS 
 
REF: A. SANAA 1546 
 
     ¶B. SANAA 1414 
     ¶C. STATE 163627 
     ¶D. SANAA 1351 
     ¶E. SANAA 1260 
     ¶F. SANAA 1259 
     ¶G. SANAA 1139 
     ¶H. SANAA 898 
     ¶I. STATE 102827 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b,c,d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Abdul Hakim al-Iryani, Advisor to Foreign 
Minister Qirbi, faxed the Embassy on July 8 (text para 3) to 
request assistance in determining the intelligence 
affiliation, if any, of Mr. Musalam Mohamed Lahmood and Mr. 
Jasim Mohamed Ibrahim.  Iryani identified Lahmood as the 
Director of the Iraqi school in Moscow, and Ibrahim as a 
teacher at the same school.  Both have requested Yemeni 
residency on financial grounds. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Post has shared the 7/8 fax with ORCA and DAO for 
action. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Text of July 8 fax from the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. 
 
(Begin text) 
 
Following are the names of two Iraqi nationals who request 
residence visa to Yemen.  1) Musalam Mohamed Lahmood, the 
director of the Iraqi School in Moscow; 2) Jasim Mohamed 
Ibrahim, English teacher in the same school.  Both men are in 
Moscow now.  Please note that the two persons are not 
diplomats, and they did not request asylum.  They indicated 
their desire to come and work in Yemen because they did not 
have any income in Moscow, and they are not allowed to work 
there.  Any information on the above mentioned persons will 
be appreciated, especially information related to possible 
links to Iraqi Intelligence. 
 
Thank you. 
 
(End text) 
 
HULL