This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, IO/UNP, IO/SHA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL SOCI PHUM CE UN
SUBJECT:  Action Request:  Sri Lankan nominee for UN 
special rapporteur position re judicial independence 
 
Ref:  Colombo-SA/INS 04/09/03 fax 
 
¶1.  (U) This message is Sensitive but Unclassified -- 
Please handle accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (U) This message contains an Action Request -- Please 
See Para 5. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On April 9, the Ambassador was approached by 
Desmond Fernando, a well known local lawyer, seeking 
support for his nomination as UN Special Rapporteur for 
Independence of Judges and Lawyers.  Mission thinks very 
highly of Fernando and believes he would be an excellent 
choice for the position.  In addition to having vast 
experience in the legal profession and on human rights 
issues, including working as an advocate for judicial 
reforms in Sri Lanka, Fernando is also favorably 
inclined to the U.S. and is a very close friend of Prime 
Minister Wickremesinghe. 
 
¶4.  (U) Some highlights of Fernando's curriculum vitae 
follow (see Reftel for full C.V.): 
 
-- Member of the London Court of International 
Arbitration Associates, 1996 to present. 
 
-- Vice President, International Commission of Jurists, 
1995-2002. 
 
-- Honorary Life Member, Bar Association of Sri Lanka, 
and Council of the International Bar Association, 1990 
and 2001 respectively. 
 
-- President, International Bar Association, 1996-1998. 
 
-- President, Bar Association of Sri Lanka, 1989-1991. 
 
-- Appointed President's Counsel in Sri Lanka, 1990. 
 
-- International Visitors Program, 1980. 
 
-- Attorney at Law, 1958. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ACTION REQUEST:  Mission asks Department to 
review Fernando's nomination for UN Special Rapportuer 
for Independence of Judges and Lawyers.  As Fernando is 
an important contact to the Mission, we would appreciate 
being able to inform him whether or not the USG supports 
his nomination as soon as possible.  END ACTION REQUEST. 
 
¶6.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS