This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 003236 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL VICE PRESIDENT JOSE ALENCAR'S PROBLEMATIC 
PERFORMANCE 
 
REF: A. A. BRASILIA 3125 
     ¶B. B. BRASILIA 02473 
 
¶1.    (SBU)  Summary.  Unlike in the U.S., Brazil's Vice 
President assumes control when the chief executive travels 
abroad.  Current VP Jose Alencar usually keeps a low profile 
in that capacity, but his underwhelming performance during 
President Lula da Silva's recent trip to New York to open the 
UNGA has raised questions about Alencar's suitability for the 
number two executive branch job.  End Summary. 
 
Alencar's Signature Moment 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  During Brazilian President Lula's recent 
international travel, Vice President Jose Alencar's 
procrastination in signing a controversial decree legalizing 
the planting and sales of genetically-modified soybeans 
generated considerable media attention (ref A). A few 
commentators allowed that the President should not have left 
Alencar holding the bag on such a contentious issue, but the 
incident nonetheless raised doubts about Alencar's 
capabilities.  Alencar had been relatively quiet over the 
last few months after he stirred debate in June by 
criticizing publicly the Central Bank's interest rate 
policies.  Unlike the interest rate flap, however, few 
believe that Alencar's recent wobbling on biotech soybeans 
was a gambit to allow the GoB to air opposing views (as a 
business contact asserted to Sao Paulo ConGen recently) or 
legitimate commentary within Alencar's area of expertise. 
Indeed, during a meeting on GMOs with a U.S. Codel, Alencar 
appeared uninformed about the issue (ref B). 
 
¶3. (SBU) The opposition is also making some political hay out 
of Alencar's performance.   The 1988 Brazilian Constitution 
directs the Vice President to assume the duties of chief 
executive when the President travels abroad.  According to 
press reports, PDT Senator Jefferson Peres has used Alencar's 
GMO stutter-step to reinvigorate a push for an amendment that 
would modify the VP's powers.  (Note. It is unlikely that 
Peres can muster the 3/5 majority needed to pass an amendment 
as the administration is opposed to the proposal. End note.) 
 
Views of a Predecessor 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) In the wake of the June interest rate flap, 
President Cardoso's (1994-2002) Vice President Marco Marciel, 
a Senator from Pernambuco, told Poloff that occasional 
contretemps between the VP and the President are predictable 
but manageable. Maciel, who served 339 days as Acting 
President, noted that the running mate is often selected to 
provide geographic or ideological (i.e. party) balance, which 
can lead to policy disconnects.  The discreet Maciel got 
along well with President Cardoso, but the VP-President 
relationship has often been rocky in Brazilian history.  In 
the case of Alencar, Maciel asserted that a relative lack of 
political experience undermines his  performance.  After a 
very successful career as a clothing exporter, Alencar 
entered politics with an unsuccessful 1994 gubernatorial bid 
in Minas Gerais before serving one senate term.  Maciel said 
Alencar's inexperience also makes it harder to craft a 
suitable "special mission" for him as provided by the 
Constitution. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Maciel does not believe that efforts to reform the 
vice presidency would make much progress unless tied to a 
much larger political reform package.  He noted that most 
Brazilian politicians believe that the inordinate number of 
times a Vice President has come to power in Brazil in the 
last 50 years (four, not counting the several temporary 
assumptions of the Presidency due to health reasons during 
the 21-year military regime) necessitates having an elected 
Vice President who is given some opportunity to serve as the 
number one. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Alencar will have ample opportunity to improve his 
performance as Acting President. If Lula maintains his 
current pace of foreign travel, the 72 year-old Alencar could 
wear the presidential sash for over 200 days this term. 
While Alencar has managed to become part of the story in two 
controversial domestic issues, he has not abused his 
authority.  At the end of the day, he signed the soybean 
decree as the President instructed.  Moreover, the Vice 
President has not been a factor in other hot button issues, 
such as tax and pension reforms, suggesting any future 
intrusions onto center-stage will be accidental.  Alencar's 
most important contribution continues to be as an 
intermediary between the business community and the Workers' 
Party-dominated administration. 
 
HRINAK