This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O.  12958:  DECL: 06-18-13 
TAGS: AMGT CE MV LTTE
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 92  (06-18-03) 
 
Classified by Joseph L. Novak, Charge d'Affaires, 
Reasons:  1.5 (b,d) 
 
CONTENTS:  MORE ON AFTERMATH OF LTTE SHIP SINKING 
-          LETTER FROM ASSASSINATED TAMIL POLITICIAN 
-          U.S. NAVY SHIP VISIT 
-          VISA REQUEST FOR PROPOSED SRI LANKAN EMBOFF 
 
MORE ON AFTERMATH OF LTTE SHIP SINKING 
-------------------------------------- 
¶1.  (C) Just wanted to flag that the situation remains 
relatively quiet in the aftermath of the June 14 sinking 
of the Tiger ship off the northeast coast (Colombo 1061, 
1053).  From what we hear, however, the Tigers remain 
very, very angry over the incident.  Thus far, however, 
the group has confined its reaction to words and not 
taken other measures (that we know of).  Re the incident, 
local newspapers had some articles today (June 18) 
alleging that the navy had not briefed officials in the 
government about the June 14 operation as it was 
happening.  This is what Moragoda mentioned to us (as 
flagged in Colombo 1061) and quite possibly leaked to the 
press subsequently.  We are not sure whether a 
controversy is brewing over this matter and it is not 
clear what, if anything, the PM plans to do about the 
navy's apparent insubordination in any case.  By the way, 
re the PM, we understand that the government-controlled 
TV channel will show his opening remarks made at Tokyo 
last week on the evening of June 19 in Sinhala and then 
in English.  (POL) 
 
LETTER FROM ASSASSINATED TAMIL POLITICIAN 
----------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) FYI.  We received a letter yesterday (June 17) 
from the Tamil politician who was assassinated in Jaffna 
on June 14 (see Colombo 1053).  In the letter, which was 
apparently a circular of sorts sent out to other local 
missions, T. Subathiran warns about the LTTE and their 
policy of killing of Tamil opponents, and he asks for 
international assistance to stop it.  The letter is 
chilling given what subsequently took place.  (POL) 
 
U.S. NAVY SHIP VISIT 
-------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) In one of the irregular visits by the U.S. Navy 
to Sri Lanka, the USS O'Kane is set to visit Colombo from 
June 20-23.  The O'Kane is a guided missile destroyer 
with a crew of around 350.  It will be holding a 
reception on board on the evening of June 21 for Sri 
Lankan military officials and Mission personnel. 
(POL/DAO) 
 
VISA REQUEST FOR PROPOSED SRI LANKAN EMBOFF 
------------------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) We sent some e-mails to the desk on the 
following matter and wonder whether it had been looked 
into.  The case involves the following:  A Sri Lankan 
named Llangakoon Adikari came to the Embassy in late May 
for a visa interview with a diplomatic note from the MFA 
that indicated that he would be going to Los Angeles as 
the Public Relations Officer of the Sri Lankan Consulate 
there.  He did not have a diplomatic passport and 
explained that this was due to his being "locally 
recruited."  He had never been to the US as far as could 
be determined.  We called the MFA regarding the 
diplomatic note and it confirmed it was real, but pointed 
out that he was not "home-based" and the Consul General 
in Los Angeles was making this hiring decision.  The 
applicant had no experience in public relations, but did 
appear to have extensive construction and drafting 
training certificates.  Based on discussions with the 
Front Office, a decision was made to make sure this 
posting decision was legitimate by asking SA/INS to check 
with Ambassador Subasinghe.  Could you get back to us 
with any information regarding this matter? -- the MFA is 
knocking on our door.  If Subasinghe thinks this fellow 
is fine for the City of Angels, okay, but it seems a bit 
fishy to us.  Thanks.  (CONS) 
 
NOVAK