This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0160 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
JUNE 14-15, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for June 14-15, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports ofteb contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
 
 
¶1.  Evrensel/ The women and students in Ankara, 
Izmir, Adana, Van and Hakkari held a meeting and 
asked for a general amnesty. The women sent fax 
messages to the President, Prime Minister, the 
Head of the GNA and to TGS and asked for the 
solution of the Kurdish problem. 
 
 
¶2.  Dunya/ Some explosions and fire have been 
reported in the Kerkuk-Yumurtalik gas pipeline. 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul announced that he 
thinks the explosion is the result of sabotage. 
Hidir Aziz, an Iraqi said " the Iraqis came and 
installed the bomb. They don't want the Americans 
to run oil to Turkey." On the other hand, a press 
spokesman for the US Army announced that the 
explosions occurred due to some leakage of gas." 
 
 
¶3.  Bolge/ The Association of National 
Independence Army in Adana declared that it would 
hurt Turkey if the US Parliament accepted the 
Armenian Massacre Law. Selahattin Gungor, the 
Head of the association, stressed his regrets 
about the law. 
 
 
¶4.  Evrensel/Serdar Tanis, The head of Hadep in 
Silopi and Ebubekir Deniz, the secretary of HADEP 
in Silopi have been reported lost for nearly 
three years. Tahir Elci, their attorney asked for 
a detailed investigation but his appeal has been 
rejected. He was told their file was marked 
Secret and no investigation could be done on 
 
SIPDIS 
their file. 
 
 
ECONOMICAL AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
  Turkiye/ The businessmen who have investments 
in the Diyarbakir Organized Industrial Zone got 
together and started an association(DOSIAD). The 
Head of the association is Muhittin Bal. 
HOLTZ