This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR P, NEA/NGA, EUR/SE, PMAT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: TURKEY REOPENS FLIGHT CORRIDOR FOR CRUISE 
MISSILE FLIGHTS 
 
(u) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons:  1.5 (B and D). 
 
 
(C) The Turkish General Staff (TGS) notified Task Force-North 
late March 26 that Turkish airspace would be re-opened to 
Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM) operations effective 
March 27.  Operations had been suspended temporarily 3/23 
pending the results of an investigation into the 3/23 
incident in which two Tomahawk missiles that were launched 
from a ship in the Mediterranean had landed near Viransehir, 
Turkey.  A joint US-Turkish team concluded its investigation 
of the incidents 3/26.  The first TLAM landed in the side of 
a hill, approximately 500 feet from a small village.  The 
second TLAM landed in relatively flat terrain, approximately 
500 feet from a different village.  There were no injuries 
and only limited property damage.  The US military has paid a 
claim in the amount of $900.00 in accordance with existing 
claims procedures.  The TLAM parts have been recovered from 
the sites and are expected to depart Turkey via USN C-9 March 
Â¶27. 
PEARSON