This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV AND DRL 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KIRF SOCI VM RELFREE HUMANR
SUBJECT: VIETNAM: THICH QUANG DO VISITS THICH HUYEN QUANG 
 
REF:  HCMC 00585 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  The Venerable Thich Quang Do, Deputy Head of the banned 
Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV), met with UBCV Patriarch 
Thich Huyen Quang at the Nguyen Thieu Monastery in Quy Nhon July 
15-20.  This was Thich Quang Do's first trip outside of HCMC since 
being placed under "probationary detention" for two years in June 
¶2001.  He traveled by train accompanied by a delegation of UBCV 
monks.  He did not inform the GVN of his travel, had no trouble 
during the trip, and there were no GVN officials at his meetings. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Several other delegations of senior monks from UBCV 
chapters in Hue, HCMC and the Central Provinces joined the group 
in Quy Nhon for a meeting to discuss the future of the UBCV.  They 
reportedly reviewed UBCV personnel throughout Vietnam from Quang 
Tri province southward.  Among the monks who participated were 
Thien Hanh, Thai Hoa, Phuoc Vien, and Nhu Dat from Hue, and Hai 
Tang from Quang Tri. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Thich Tue Sy spoke to ConGen after Thich Quang Do had 
returned to the Thanh Minh Zen Monastery in HCMC.  Thich Tue Sy 
said he did not think Thich Quang Do has had any problems with the 
authorities since his return.  Thich Tue Sy expressed his 
appreciation for the "external intervention" that had convinced 
the GVN to allow the monks to travel so freely. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Thich Quang Do has, however, developed some health 
problems with his heart.  He had a physical examination prior to 
his trip to Quy Nhon and got permission from his doctors to travel 
while waiting for the results.  He will find out soon whether he 
will need surgery.  He has no future plans to travel due to his 
health and had postponed his visit to Thich Huyen Quang from July 
10 because of his health problems.  According to Thich Tue Sy, 
Thich Huyen Quang is in better health at 86 years of age than 
Thich Quang Do is at 74. 
 
WHITE