This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR MASS MCAP JO
SUBJECT: EMBASSY POSITION ON THIRD PARTY TRANSFER OF ROYAL 
JORDAN AIR FORCE RESIDUAL SPARE PARTS TO INTERTRADE 
AVIATION CORP., AS REQUESTED BY JORDAN 
 
¶1. U.S. Embassy Amman concurs with the GOJ request for third 
party transfer of F-5 A/B spare parts to Intertrade Aviation 
Corporation, 5722 Buckingham Drive, Huntington Beach, CA 
¶92649. 
 
¶2. Basis for Request: 
 
¶A. Items being transferred: 1 valve, vent (NON-SME), value 
USD 937.02; 3 valve, vent (NON-SME), value USD 2,790.06; 7 
duct, insulation (NON-SME), value USD 871.92; 16 bearing 
(NON-SME), value USD 211.20; 1 jig installation (NON-SME), 
value USD 634.48.  TOTAL VLAUE OF ALL ITEMS: USD 5,444.68. 
 
¶B. Source Program of the Defense Article Proposed for 
Transfer: Excess FMS articles not being used on current F-5 
models.  According to the RJAF, these parts were originally 
donated to Jordan by the Iranian Air Force in the 1970s with 
USG approval at the time. 
 
¶C. Acquisition Cost: No cost to the RJAF 
 
¶D. Point of Contact at Intertrade Aviation Corporation 
familiar with the Proposed Transfer and to whom required 
assurance commitment language can be referred: Mr. Ted 
Newfield; TEL: 714-895-3335 
 
¶E. Proposed Use: Eventual sale by Intertrade Aviation 
 
¶F. U.S. and Recipient Security Interests Served by the 
Proposed Transfer: RJAF will be able to use funds generated 
from sale of these surplus items for other more critical 
needs. 
 
¶G. Purposed Timeframe or Time Constraints: N/A 
 
¶H. Demilitarization: N/A 
 
¶3. Other Considerations: 
 
¶A.  Impact on Force Structure: None 
 
¶B. Anticipated Reactions of Neighboring Nations: None 
 
¶C. Ability to Operate and Maintain: N/A 
 
¶D. Financial Considerations: The RJAF will obtain USD 
5,444.68 as a result of this transfer. 
 
¶E. Relevant Human Rights Considerations: The Jordanian 
military have no history of human rights abuses and support 
civilian control of the military.  There are no human rights 
considerations precluding the transfer of the specified items. 
 
Conclusion and Recommendation: Transfer of the above listed 
F-5 A/B spare parts will allow Jordan to dispose of items it 
no longer requires and will generate a small amount of funds 
which can be utilized for current needs.  Recommend approval 
of third party transfer of the listed F-5 Spare Parts to 
Intertrade Aviation Corporation of Huntington Beach CA. 
GNEHM