This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, DS FOR TAYLOR, S/CT FOR BLACK, 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CJTF HOA, NSC FOR TOWNSEND AND MCCRAVEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/29/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC PGOV YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: ROYG OPERATION AGAINST TERRORISTS IN ABYAN 
 
REF: SANAA 1440 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary and Comment:  On June 25, ROYG launched 
an offensive against terrorists suspected in the June 21 
attack on a ROYG military medical convoy in Abyan (ref).  The 
successful operation resulted in approximately 30 combatants 
killed or captured.  Initial reports indicate a link between 
these terrorists and al-Qaeda, and the strong ROYG response 
appears to have dealt an important and successful blow 
against attempts to re-establish a strong al-Qaeda presence 
in Yemen.  The contribution of U.S.-trained Central Security 
Forces (CSF), the open lines of communication between ROYG 
and the Embassy during this operation and strong 
counterterrorism cooperation between Yemen and the U.S. 
generally emphasize the importance of continuing robust CT 
training assistance.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Additional information on both attacks has been 
reported via ORCA and other channels. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
ROYG Operation Against Possible AAIA Remnants in Abyan 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  The attack on a ROYG military medical convoy by 
terrorists, believed to be comprised of remnants of the 
Aden-Abyan Islamic Army (AAIA) and other extremists, in Abyan 
on June 21 left seven injured (ref).  In response, 
approximately 700 ROYG military and security forces gathered 
in the region of the Hatat mountains in Abyan governorate on 
June 24.  Five terrorists surrendered overnight on June 24 
according to DMI sources.  After negotiations for surrender 
failed and the 1000 June 25 deadline passed without result, 
the ROYG forces began their assault on the remaining 
terrorists (estimated at 80-100 persons).  The combined ROYG 
forces included the Army and U.S.-trained Central Security 
Forces (CSF).  Involvement of possible Political Security 
Organization (PSO) forces could not be confirmed.  The attack 
began with an artillery barrage, followed by helicopter 
attacks and a frontal assault by ground forces. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Consistent but unconfirmed reports from press 
reports and other sources put the number of extremists killed 
or captured at between 20 and 30.  Those captured were being 
interrogated.  Press reports confirmed by CSF also indicate 
that a large amount of explosives and weapons were also 
seized on June 25. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
PSO Chief Gamish -- Terrorist Leader Linked to al-Qaeda? 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  At the request of President Saleh via a phone 
call to the Ambassador, the Ambassador and ORCA Chief met 
with Political Security Organization (PSO) Chief Gamish on 
6/26.  Gamish said the reputed leader of the insurgents, Abu 
Bashir Abdul Nabi, was recently in Saudi Arabia and came to 
Yemen in the last three months.  A mujaheed who fought in 
Afghanistan, his mission in Abyan was allegedly to 
re-organize Yemeni al-Qaeda, which has been degraded in the 
last year.  Press reports stated that Abdul Nabi was killed 
in action, and Col. Yahya Saleh of the CSF confirmed that he 
was killed.  Gamish reported that two ROYG forces were killed 
in action and that several captured extremists were being 
interrogated.  DMI told the DATT that two ROYG forces were 
killed and three wounded. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
ROYG Op Successful -- U.S.-trained Forces Key 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)    The Central Security Forces (CSF) 
Counterterrorism Unit is a newly formed entity within the 
Central Security Organization (CSO).  The unit currently 
consists of approximately 150 officers and enlisted.  All 
members of the unit received basic training in rural and 
urban CT tactics.  The training has been and continues to be 
provided by U.S. and U.K. military trainers.  Both groups of 
trainers assess the unit members as being highly motivated. 
The Republic of Yemen Government (ROYG) touts this unit as 
the National CT unit of Yemen. 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  The CSF CT Unit deployed to the Abyan area in 
response to the 6/21 attack on the ROYG military medical 
team.  This unit was the only ground element that was 
deployed from the North of Yemen.  They were heavily involved 
in the fighting, engaging the enemy at ranges as close as 15 
meters.  They were also tasked to clear and search in excess 
of 20 caves. The unit returned to Sana'a after the 
hostilities on June 27 only to be redeployed on the morning 
of June 28.  The ongoing effort is aimed at further 
exploiting the caves for intelligence and looking for 
remnants of the terrorist group. 
 
¶8.  (S/NF)  On the evening of June 28, CSF officials invited 
U.S. military trainers to view film footage of combat 
operations conducted by the CSF during the Abyan operation. 
The film confirmed the capture of a large quantity of 
explosives and at least six dead terrorists.  The dead 
terrorists did not appear to be native Yemenis but foreign 
fighters with long beards and military-style ammo vests.  CSF 
indicated that a reduced-length copy of the film will be 
released to the Embassy in the near future. 
 
-------------------------- 
Comment and Recommendation 
-------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C)  President Saleh and others have requested continued 
U.S. support for counterterrorism training and the Embassy is 
studying requests for an expansion of economic assistance to 
the Abyan governorate as an area targeted by extremists as an 
operations area.  Somewhat unusually, the ROYG kept the 
Embassy continually informed on developments and invited the 
media to cover the operation.  Additionally, the effective 
performance of the U.S.-trained CSF adds a strong argument 
for sorely-needed further funding to continue and expand CT 
training. 
HULL