This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 004904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL IZ IT IRAQI FREEDOM
SUBJECT: ITALIAN ADVISOR TO IRAQ SEES THE GLASS AS HALF 
FULL -- AND PUBLIC DIPLOMACY EFFORTS COULD HELP FILL IT UP 
 
REF: A. ROME 4696 
     ¶B. ROME 4130 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Acting DCM and PolOff attended a 22 
October seminar on "Iraq -- Six Months After" with Italian 
Ambassador Pietro Cordone, who recently left his position as 
Advisor to the Iraqi Minister of Culture.  Cordone was 
extremely positive in his assessment of US efforts in Iraq, 
but believes the US needs to step up its public diplomacy 
efforts to make sure that news of the good work being done 
gets out.  One of Berlusconi's closest advisors, who recently 
returned from a trip to Baghdad, echoed the need to promote 
the CPA's achievements.  Separately, Italian officials are 
indicating they would welcome, and respond positively to, 
offers to fill other senior positions in the CPA.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The seminar, subtitled "The return of civilian life -- 
the recovery of archeological heritage," focused on Cordone's 
experiences during his tenure as Iraqi Minister of Culture 
under the CPA and subsequently Senior Advisor to the Iraqi 
Minister of Culture.  Cordone's presentation was extremely 
complimentary towards Ambassador Bremer and US efforts in 
Baghdad.  However, he warned that the general population was 
not aware of what the CPA was accomplishing and that more 
public diplomacy officers are needed to overcome this 
"information vacuum." 
 
¶3. (U) Cordone cited the fact that Iraq's Ministers are now 
Iraqis (with the former coalition partner "Ministers" 
relegated to the position of Senior Advisors) as evidence 
that Iraqis are beginning to take control of their own 
country.  The US, he stressed, should promote the visibility 
of the IGC to overcome the perception of the CPA as an 
occupational authority. It was in this vein that Cordone 
himself refused the request of the Iraqi Minister of Culture 
to sit next to him at a recent press conference, which would 
have given the impression of foreign interference in national 
affairs. 
 
¶4. (U) Cordone cited the attendance of 1,200 people -- 
despite the inherent security risks of such a mass public 
gathering -- at an Iraqi national symphony concert as a 
symbol of the beginning of normalization of civilian life in 
Baghdad (Comment.  The Iraqi National Symphony has been 
invited to perform at the Kennedy Center on December 9.  End 
Comment). However, he warned that the situation was more 
difficult outside of Baghdad and strongly urged the US to 
increase its public diplomacy efforts outside of the capital. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Gen. Cecchi, Head of Italy's Joint Staff for 
military operations, who also attended the seminar, said that 
most Italians are not aware that Italy, with over 2,500 
troops participating in Operation Antica Babilonia, has the 
third largest military component in Iraq.  (Comment. Italian 
Special Envoy to Iraq Armellini told Econ M/C and econ and 
pol officers that Italy also has the third largest civilian 
component (septel).  Italy will have to keep its eye on the 
size of the Poles' contingent, however, if it wants to keep 
the bronze medal for military contributions. End comment.) 
DefMin Martino's Senior Diplomatic Advisor Trupiano told 
Pol-Mil Counselor on 24 October that Martino would like Italy 
to have a senior advisor on Amb. Bremer's staff.  Trupiano 
said his government is not pushing any particular candidate 
("the person could be military or civilian"), or even eyeing 
a specific position for now, but that Italy would like to 
have a "greater role" in the CPA. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In a recent visit to southern Iraq to visit Italian 
troops and witness the local community's first steps toward 
democracy, the Defense Committees leaders of the Italian 
Senate and Chamber stressed Italy's determination to support 
the Iraqi reconstruction effort.  Citing the inaugural 
session of Nasirya's provincial as "a first, fundamental step 
towards achieving a peaceful and democratic society," Chamber 
Defense Committee President Ramponi said, "We hope to succeed 
in brining peace and calm to your people with your efforts, 
too." 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment. Cordone's positive remarks towards the US 
and the situation in Baghdad are particularly surprising 
given his brush with violence on 18 September, two weeks 
before his scheduled departure, when US soldiers mistakenly 
 
 
fired upon his vehicle, killing his interpreter and grazing 
the Ambassador (Ref A).  Indeed, Cordone never mentioned the 
incident during the two-hour seminar, instead praising the 
teamwork, expertise, and strong work ethic of his American 
colleagues. 
 
¶8. (SBU) PolOff also spoke with one of PM Berlusconi's 
Diplomatic Advisors, Paolo Dionisi, about his recent trip to 
Baghdad (Ref B).  Dionisi was less optimistic, although he 
admitted that he did not have the benefit of seeing the 
progress made during the six months of the CPA.  Dionisi said 
there is an underlying tension in the air that makes it easy 
for minor events, such as a traffic incident or security 
search, to turn violent.  Dionisi also, however, stressed the 
need for the US to spread the news of the positive 
developments in the capital out into the provinces, but noted 
that the security situation complicates these efforts. 
 
Minimize considered. 
SEMBLER 
 
 
NNNN 
	2003ROME04904 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED