This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 005475 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS MARR PGOV XF IZ IT IRAQI FREEDOM
SUBJECT: IRAQ: MOD MARTINO VOWS ITALY WILL STAY THE COURSE 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Italian MOD Martino told parliament December 
3 that Italy will keep its troops in Iraq, because pulling 
out now would create a "dangerous vacuum."  In stating 
Italy's unrenounceable and firm commitment to combat 
international terrorism, he remarked that the nature of the 
mission remains unchanged (he stressed its humanitarian 
aspect), the troops are now "fully legitimized" by the UN, 
and the Government would seek parliament's approval to 
extend funding through June 2004.  He said Italy will not 
nor was it asked to  increase its military presence there. 
He also called for more multilateral involvement in 
managing the crisis and explicitly asked for an "EU stance" 
on Iraq.  End summary. 
 
Italy won't pull out; the UN has legitimized its presence 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2.  MOD Martino appeared before the Chamber of Deputies 
Defense Committee December 3 for one of his periodic, 
scheduled briefings on Iraq  also in view of a 
parliamentary debate early next year to extend funding for 
the Italian military mission beyond the December 31 
deadline that was approved by parliament last July. 
Martino said that, in spite of the deteriorating security 
situation there, "it is impossible to pull out now," 
because it would mean "creating a lethal power vacuum and 
handing the region over to extremism, fanaticism, and 
destabilization."  Responding to the center-left's growing 
demands for UN involvement in Iraq and for a speedy 
y 
transition of powers back to the Iraqis, he said that, with 
UNSCR 1511, the "international community in its entirety 
recognizes that we are in Iraq with the UN's full 
legitimation" and the UN, "in confirming the intervention's 
humanitarian nature, indicates a path to return the 
sovereignty of power to the people of Iraq as soon as 
possible."  He noted that Italy "recognizes itself fully in 
this project." 
 
Multilateral involvement is necessary: EU, NATO 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  Even though Italy does not underestimate the 
difficulties involved, Martino remarked, it will continue 
to support and work for a "united and strong UN position" 
on Iraq's institutional and material reconstruction and for 
an "increasingly multilateral involvement" in managing the 
crisis.  In a press interview the day before, and before 
the Committee, he stated the need for the EU to "make its 
presence felt" and for "an EU stance" on Iraq, arguing that 
the not-a-single-penny-and-not-a-single-soldier notion no 
longer worked: terrorism is a problem not only for Iraq and 
its neighbors, but also for Europe and is "becoming more 
dangerous for Europe than for the United States."  European 
involvement should not be excluded, "if the EU will be 
capable of carrying out military operations autonomously." 
 
¶4.  However, Martino does not think a special EU summit on 
Iraq  requested by the center-left  would be appropriate. 
"Summits are called when one is sure they will be 
successful.  If they are destined to fail, they would only 
make the situation worse," he said.  He noted, instead, 
that FM Frattini would raise the issue in the appropriate 
fora.  Underscoring the point further, he pointed to 
"complaints on more than one occasion" about "excessive 
unilateralism" by the U.S., whereas both U.S. Republicans 
and Democrats "are all calling for Europeans to be more 
closely involved in the area of common security."  Iraq 
q 
would be a starting point, he implied.  NATO could also 
possibly get involved, he added, "if a provisional 
government in Baghdad were to call for its intervention." 
 
Italian military mission remains unchanged 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  Regardless of possible future scenarios, the scope of 
the Italian military mission is "to offer a better future 
to the people of Iraq."  "The military mission remains the 
same" and the dramatic crescendo of attacks and alerts 
"strengthens our commitment," albeit under enhanced 
security conditions.  "In conjunction with our allies," 
Italy remains to "create the conditions of security and 
stability that are necessary for humanitarian assistance 
and to rebuild the country."  He reminded the 
parliamentarians that the Italians were in Iraq to "carry 
 
out missions of reconnaissance and surveillance, protection 
and security, stabilization and assistance," as approved by 
parliament on April 15 this year. 
 
Saddam's militia and Al Qaida spread terror with local help 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶6.  Martino argued that the recent crescendo of 
"indiscriminate attacks" against civilian and military 
targets wants to increase "unease and uncertainty" among 
the local population and create mistrust toward the 
coalition.  He said the "Feddayeen Saddam" militia was 
mostly responsible for the attacks  including the one 
against the Italian Carabinieri headquarters in Nassiriya - 
- with the help of non-Iraqi Al Qaeda elements and possibly 
some local coverage.  "Our men did not die in battle, but 
were slaughtered by terrorist assassins.  These terrorists, 
who come mostly from outside Iraq, are the real enemies of 
the people of Iraq.  They don't want normal life to 
resume," but want to destabilize the entire country.  The 
Italians were killed "because they are well regarded by the 
local population, which considers the Italian contingent 
for what it is: not an occupation force, but a force of 
support and peace." 
 
We will remain to do our job, we will defeat terror 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7.  According to Martino, "terrorists have turned Iraq into 
a test case."  For them, "losing the challenge in Iraq 
probably means losing their global challenge."  Their 
intent in Iraq "is to undermine consensus within the 
coalition countries and induce them to leave Iraq before 
the consolidation of a new course, before creating an 
alternative to anarchy and chaos.  It is a trap into which 
we must not fall.  Our every attempt to withdraw from the 
clash by giving in and making concessions would only 
convince the enemy of our weakness and induce him to 
increase his attack against the new Iraqi course and 
foreign civilian and military interests...  We will 
therefore remain."  Recalling Italy's struggle against 
domestic terrorism during the 1970s and 1980s, "we will be 
capable of defeating even this terrorism, this global 
terrorism," he concluded. 
 
CPA Bagdhad minimize considered. 
 
Sembler 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME05475 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED