This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121736Z Nov 03UNCLAS ANKARA 007040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SE AND PM/RSAT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS TU
SUBJECT: THIRD COUNTRY TRANSFER OF USS RAZORBACK:  MFA 
PROVIDES RATIONALE FOR REQUEST TO TRANSFER TITLE IN TURKEY 
 
 
REF: A) ANKARA 6811 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See Para 4. 
 
 
¶2. On November 10, the Embassy received a diplomatic note 
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that provides the GOT's 
rationale for wanting to transfer title of the vessel USS 
Razorback in Turkey (the dip note was faxed to EUR/SE 
November 10). 
 
 
¶3. Begin text of MFA note no. 2003/ALGY/451294: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the Embassy's Note No: 1583 
dated October 15, 2003 regarding the transfer of TCG Murat 
Reis/USS Razorback to USS Razorback/TCG Murat Reis 
Association in North Little Rock/Arkansas for use as a static 
display has the honor to convey the following: 
 
 
a) The Ministry appreciates the approval by US authorities of 
the request to transfer the said submarine to the Association 
resident in North Little Rock/Arkansas. 
 
 
b) However, as the natural outcome of the understanding that 
no legal and financial liability will be attributed to the 
Turkish Government during the transfer of the submarine, the 
Ministry kindly requests the transfer of title of the 
submarine to the said Association be realized in Turkey. 
 
 
In view of the foregoing and in order to realize a transfer 
that will eventually form yet another link in 
Turkish-American friendship that all those in and also those 
visiting North Little Rock may benefit from, the Ministry 
kindly requests the reconsideration of the United States 
authorities regarding location of the transfer of the title 
of the TCG Murat Reis/USS Razorback. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurance of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
Ankara, November 7, 2003. 
End Text. 
 
 
¶4. Action request:  Post appreciates the Department's 
willingness to work with the GOT and the association to 
finalize this request.  While we are disappointed that the 
MFA's diplomatic note provides little in the way of 
additional justification behind the Turkish military's 
position of transferring title of the vessel in Turkey, we 
hope the Department, together with the association and GOT 
officials, can find a way to approve the transfer in a manner 
that is acceptable to Turkish officials and that is in 
accordance with US laws and regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDELMAN