This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  VATICAN 004918 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE LEVIN; NEA/RA; IO/UNP; DRL/IRF: DEATHERAGE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2013 
TAGS: IZ KIRF PREL VT
SUBJECT: HOLY SEE AND IRAQ: NEW PASSPORTS, UNSCR, CHALDEAN 
PATRIARCH 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 294152 
     ¶B. B) VATICAN 283 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Jim Nicholson for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains an action request.  Please see 
paragraph 3. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
HOLY SEE FORESEES NO PROBLEM ON PASSPORT REQUEST 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (U) Poloff met October 24 with Holy See Office Director 
for Iraq Franco Coppola to deliver Ref A demarche and 
non-paper on Iraqi diplomatic and service passports. 
Coppola did not anticipate that the Vatican would have any 
difficulty honoring Iraqi passports or facilitating travel of 
Iraqi diplomatic and official personnel.  Coppola took on 
board our nonpaper, noting the serial numbers of the 
passports in question. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
ACTION REQUEST: IRAQI DIPLOMATIC PERSONNEL 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Coppola said that the Holy See has had no news of a 
new Iraqi ambassador to the Vatican.  He was also unsure of 
the whereabouts of the former ambassador to the Vatican, 
Abdul-Amir Al-Anbari (and his staff).  Post has previously 
advised the Holy See per Department guidance that the 
Ambassador had failed to report to the Provisional 
Authorities in Iraq and therefore should no longer considered 
an Iraqi representative.  Post requests information on plans 
for Iraqi diplomatic presence in Vatican City and any revised 
guidance on the diplomatic/legal status of previous Iraqi 
diplomatic staff accredited to the Holy See. 
 
--------------------- 
UNSCR: A STEP FORWARD 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Turning to the recently-passed UN Security Council 
Resolution (UNSCR) on Iraq, Coppola called it "a step 
forward."  He acknowledged the importance of the unanimous 
vote on the resolution, and said its passage was not just a 
victory for the U.S., but for the entire Security Council, 
which the Holy See believes needs to find common ground and 
cooperate on Iraq.  Still, Coppola lamented the lack of 
enthusiasm on the part of some members of the Security 
Council, and said the next step would be for all parties to 
exhibit "concrete collaboration on the ground."  In a related 
point, Coppola noted the presence of Archbishop Paul Josef 
Cordes, President of the Pontifical Council Cor Unum, at the 
international donors conference for Iraqi recnstruction in 
Madrid.  Cor Unum is the arm of th Vatican that coordinates 
the activities of Vatian-related development agencies and 
distributes onations made to the Church for worldwide 
humaniarian aid initiatives (REF D).  Archbishop Cordes had 
visited Iraq shortly after the end of hostilities to deliver 
assistance from the Pope and coordinate Catholic assistance 
with local bishops and Caritas Iraq, which remains active in 
providing medical assistance in major cities. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
DECISION SHOULD COME SOON ON NEW CHALDEAN PATRIARCH 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (C) Turning to the pending decision to name a new 
patriarch of the Chaldean Catholic Church in Iraq, Coppola 
said a decision by the Pope should be forthcoming "in the 
coming days."  After the death of Chaldean Patriarch Raphael 
Bidawid in July, a synod of Chaldean bishops convened in 
Baghdad in August to select a new patriarch; however, no 
candidate gained the necessary percentage of votes to be 
forwarded to the Pope for his approval.  In this case, 
Coppola told us, the Pope has a free hand to choose the next 
patriarch, and will do so soon.  The Holy See recognizes it 
should not "leave the Chaldeans without a leader for too 
long," Coppola said.  (COMMENT: The new Chaldean Patriarch 
will likely play a role in Chaldean efforts to gain greater 
representation in Iraqi government structures.  While 19 
Chaldean religious leaders complained in a September letter 
to the Coalition Provisional Authority of insufficient 
representation of Christians on national councils and 
commissions, Vatican news agency Fides reported later in the 
month on Christian representation on several regional 
councils.  END COMMENT.) 
 
¶6. (U) Minimize considered. 
 
 
Nicholson 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2003VATICA04918 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL