This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 006599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/15/2013 
TAGS: KPAL IS ASEC PTER JO
SUBJECT: JORDANIANS CONDEMN BOMBING OF U.S. CONVOY IN GAZA, 
WAIT FOR U.S. REACTION 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Jordanians expressed shock and condemnation in the 
immediate aftermath of the October 15 attack on a U.S. 
diplomatic convoy in the Gaza Strip.  The GOJ strongly 
condemned the bombing and extended its condolences to the 
families of the victims.  Noting that the investigation into 
the attack is in the early stages, some of our contacts were 
not convinced that official Americans were the intended 
target. They worried that the incident could spark a new 
round of violence that could, in turn, increase anti-US 
sentiment in Jordan.  See septel for account of Embassy Amman 
EAC meeting. End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
GOJ REACTS STRONGLY TO THE BOMBING 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C)  The GOJ reacted with shock and condemnation to the 
October 15 attack on a U.S. diplomatic convoy in Gaza. 
Foreign Minister Muasher's Private Office Director, Ali 
al-Ayed, told PolCouns just after the blast that the death of 
Americans in Gaza came as a complete shock.  He expressed the 
GOJ's strong condemnation of the attack, as well as its deep 
condolences to the families of those killed and injured.  He 
said he had briefed Foreign Minister Muasher (who is 
currently out of the country) by phone as soon as he heard 
about the attack, and expected Muasher to condemn it publicly 
at the first opportunity.  Security and police sources did 
not expect the attack to cause unrest in Jordan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
SOME NOT CONVINCED OFFICIAL AMERICANS WERE THE INTENDED TARGET 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶3. (C)  Many of our contacts immediately after the bombing 
expressed shock at the news, but were not convinced that 
official Americans were the intended target.  Jordanian 
publisher and peace process specialist Ghazi Sa'di told us 
that if the bombing was intended to hit Americans, this 
clearly was wrong since American involvement is needed for 
peace efforts, including monitoring activities.  Former 
government minister and current university professor Suleiman 
Arabiyat denounced the bombing as "shameful," especially 
since the convoy was going into Gaza for purely peaceful 
civilian purposes.  He added that it benefited no one but the 
enemies of peace and cannot be justified. 
 
¶4. (C)  Former member of Parliament and Fatah member Hamadeh 
Faraneh said the bombing was very regrettable and should be 
condemned.  Faraneh mentioned that he was with former Gaza 
security chief Mohammad Dahlan in Amman when Dahlan got a 
call informing him of the bombing.  Faraneh said that Dahlan 
was visibly upset and said he would return to Gaza 
immediately, canceling an appointment in Egypt. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
OTHERS WORRY ATTACK COULD SPARK NEW ROUND OF VIOLENCE 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. (C)  Director of Jordan University's Center for Strategic 
Studies Mustafa Hamarneh expressed shock at the news of the 
attack and said that if Palestinian militants were 
responsible, it would be a "grave development," given that 
the Palestinian groups had thus far confined their attacks to 
Israeli interests.  He worried that the bombing would spark a 
new round of violence in the Palestinian areas that could, in 
turn, increase anti-American sentiment in Jordan. 
 
¶6. (C)  Jamal Talhat, fellow at the Jordanian Armed Forces 
staff college, says that if Palestinian militants had 
specifically targeted the U.S., it means that they have 
reached the level of "self-destruction," as it will only 
deepen U.S.-Israeli cooperation against them.  By going after 
a non-Israeli non-military target, it also means that whoever 
was 
responsible has lost the distinction between legitimate 
resistance and terrorism. 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT: This initial reaction -- although skeptical 
that U.S. officials could have been targeted -- is 
surprisingly objective, recognizing that such attacks further 
jeopardize the U.S. capacity to sustain peace efforts. 
GNEHM