This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000750 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR AF/W AND OES/OMC 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS SENV ETRD
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: TURTLE EXCLUDER DEVICES 
 
REF: STATE 54094 
 
 
¶1. A. Ajibola, Deputy Director of Fisheries at the 
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources' 
Fisheries Resources Monitoring Control and 
Surveillance Unit in Lagos, told Econoff that, since 
being first certified in 1999 and last certified in 
2002, Nigeria continues in its efforts to protect sea 
turtles during shrimp harvesting, including the use of 
turtle excluder devices (TEDs) by shrimping trawlers. 
He said that with technical assistance and training 
provided by the USG, TEDs are being fabricated 
domestically, and the Ministry is confident that its 
program to protect sea turtles is effective. 
 
 
¶2. Mr. Ajibola states the GON welcomes another visit 
by USG observers and technical advisers and asks that 
any such request be forwarded both to the Ministry in 
Abuja and its office in Lagos for better coordination. 
 
 
¶3. Special Assistant to the Minister of State for 
Environment Beka told Econoff the GON has a formal 
policy on the use of turtle excluder devices (TEDs) 
for shrimp harvesting. Post will forward a copy of 
that policy to OES/OMC as soon as it is made available 
to Econoff. 
JETER