This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 002741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - NOVEMBER 18, 2003 
 
Classified By: CTC AUSTIN G. GILREATH, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S) Begin Summary:  Charge convened an EAC meeting on 18 
November to consider further the repercussions of the 17 
November 2003 extradition of Sheikh al-Moayad from Germany to 
the United States, and any appropriate embassy response.  The 
Embassy has not seen, nor is there visible cause to expect 
widespread demonstrations or anti-US political activity as a 
result of the extradition.  The embassy will maintain close 
liaison with Yemeni security bodies, continue to monitor the 
situation with close attention, and adjust its actions when 
and if warranted.  Key offices and personnel represented at 
the meeting included:  POL/ECON, CONS, RSO, MO, FPD, POL/MIL, 
DAO, OMC, and SOC YEMEN.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Charge opened by briefing the EAC on an 18 
November morning meeting with Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Qirbi to discuss the al-Moayad case.  Qirbi's approach was 
low-key. (septel) 
 
¶3. (C)  The A/RSO briefed that his office had no indications 
of a threat or planned demonstration.  There is no 
information, including from MOI, to elaborate on FM Qirbi's 
mention to Charge of a pro-Moayad "demonstration" at the 
Presidential Palace on 11/17.  PD said that the issue had 
lingered too long in the courts and that the timing of the 
release during Ramadan had apparently served to dampen any 
anti-US energies.  In his survey of press coverage, the DAO 
said reporting of the release was largely factual and not 
inflammatory; in fact, one newspaper even presented some of 
the USG's evidence against al-Moayad in its reporting. 
POL/ECON Chief briefed the EAC on her 18 November meeting 
with the German DCM, who said that as of 18 November the 
embassy was re-opened without any incidents to report. 
 
---------------- 
EAC Actions 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The EAC decided not to issue a warden message.  The 
embassy will continue to closely monitor weekend events and 
Friday sermons.  Upcoming social events are to proceed as 
scheduled with necessary security measures in place for each. 
 The PD Iftar dinner on 19 November will continue as planned, 
and RSO has appropriate security arrangements in place. 
MISENHEIMER