This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA FOR 
JBORNS/KFARNSWORTH 
 
 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID TU ADANA
SUBJECT:  MAY 5 BINGOL EARTHQUAKE UPDATE 
 
 
REF:  A) ANKARA 2840 B) ANKARA 2868 
 
 
¶1. (U) Press sources put the toll from the Bingol 
earthquake at 167 killed and 521 injuries.  Rescue 
operations were concluded on Sunday, May 4.  At the 
Celtiksuyu Boarding School, GOT rescue teams saved 114 
students from the wreckage but 84 students and one 
teacher were killed.  Riots also appear to have ceased. 
 
 
¶2. (U) The Turkish Red Crescent distributed 6500 tents in 
the province, including 1100 tents disbursed to the 
villages.  Press reports state that 82 houses collapsed 
and 1100 additional homes are in uninhabitable condition. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) The national press is full of stories suggesting 
some of the damage - specifically the collapse of the 
boarding school - was the result of shoddy construction, 
which in turn is linked to corruption.  An official from 
the Turkish Chamber of Architects and Engineers, who went 
to the site to look into these claims, is quoted as 
saying the "placement of the building was wrong, the 
construction techniques were wrong, and the concrete used 
was extremely weak."  Bingol Governor Huseyin Cos, one of 
the main targets of last Friday's violent demonstrations, 
has promised a full investigation into the school's 
construction.  Press reports quote Bulent Arinc, Turkish 
Parliament Speaker, calling for the prosecution of those 
responsible for the shoddy construction of the school. 
HOLTZ