This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 005866 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC PREL TU
SUBJECT: LETTER TO HHS SECRETARY THOMPSON FROM TURKISH 
MINISTER OF NATIONAL EDUCATION 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1625 
     ¶B. STATE 54900 
     ¶C. 02 ANKARA 7265 
 
 
¶1.  Post received Turkish MFA dip note no. 2003/CKGY/360370 
requesting embassy to forward a letter to HHS Secretary 
Thompson from Minister of National Education Huseyin Celik 
announcing GOT support to the U.S. candidacy to the Executive 
Board. 
 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
 
Tommy G. THOMPSON 
Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 
SIPDIS 
Washington, DC 
 
 
August 29, 2003 
 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary, 
 
 
I have carefuly read your letter dated July 31 2003.  You, 
while underlining the decision of the United States of 
America to rejoin UNESCO, have indicated the special areas in 
which U.S. Department of Health can contribute to UNESCO's 
efforts and emphasized the importance of the clean slate 
within the Electoral Group 1 during the elections to the 
Executive Board to be held during the 32nd General Conference 
of UNESCO. 
 
 
I have taken up this issue with my relevant Minister 
colleagues.  We share your views regarding reaching a "clean 
slate" within the Electoral Group 1 for the elections to the 
Executive Board.  I even would go further and suggest that 
efforts should be spent to attain consensus to have "clean 
slate" in the group for other committees as well. The 
existing membership-structure requires a more advanced level 
of solidarity and cooperation within the Electoral Group 1. 
I am fully confident that a workable and sustainable 
arrangement can be achieved in line with the goal both our 
Governments aim at. 
 
 
In this context allow me to mention that my Government has 
announced her candidature for the World Heritage Committee. 
The details of this candidature have already been taken up 
with the United States Permanent Observer Mission to UNESCO. 
 
 
I have the pleasure to inform you that Turkey is looking 
forward to welcome the United States of America to UNESCO and 
will enthusiastically support the candidature of the U.S. to 
the Executive Board. 
 
 
Yours sincerely, 
  /S/ 
Assoc. Prof. Huseyin Celik 
Minister of National Education 
 
 
END TEXT 
EDELMAN