This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 002085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DRL/PHD FOR SONDRA GOVATSKI AND PATRICK HARVEY 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV PHUM NI
SUBJECT: WARRI FORUM ON PEACE PROJECT 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 327030 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1488 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTERNET OR INTRANET. 
 
 
¶1.  The Warri Forum on Peace, Security and Human Rights is an 
important project of our Mission in Nigeria, and it has 
already achieved some successes.  One month later than the 
original approved proposal, and reported in several e-mails 
to DRL, the Field Research and Writing of the Working Paper 
Phase 1 of the project was done in August and September 2003, 
the Phase 2 Analysis and Planning meeting in Abuja with 
leaders of the Warri communities, the oil companies, NGOs, 
the Nigerian Government and other stakeholders was October 
16, and the Phase 3 Establishment of the Warri Forum 
three-day conference in Asaba was November 17-20.  In the 
absence of funds from DRL, post received funding from other 
sources for Phases two and three, and the implementing 
organization AAPW did Phase 1 out of its own funds.  A 
front-channel septel reporting on the three-day conference 
will be forthcoming from Consulate General Lagos. 
 
 
¶2.  The fourth Phase, titled Facilitation of the Warri 
Forum's Meetings and including monitoring continued progress 
of the Forum, was to be six months from November 2003 to 
April 2004.  To respond to Ref A, Post requests guidance from 
DRL about continuing the Warri Forum program with DRL 
funding, for which we see three alternatives: 
 
 
¶A.  Implementing Phase 4 as per the original proposal and 
budget approved by DRL, where the grantee AAPW would 
facilitate continuing activities for only six months, 
spending USD 7,578. 
 
 
¶B.  Expanding the project beyond its original 
communication/conflict resolution/peacebuilding focus to 
tackle root causes of the conflicts in the Warri area per Ref 
B, and likely spending close to the USD 50,000 figure in the 
original DRL approval. 
 
 
¶C.  Extending the originally approved project's Phase 4 
Facilitation from six months to one year, improving the Warri 
Forum's sustainability, with a budget of around USD 14,000. 
 
 
¶3.  Post recommends Option C.  The preliminary budget 
breakdown would be: 
 
 
Honoraria - 2 persons for 36 days at USD 100 per day, 
totaling USD 7200. 
Lodging - 2 persons for 24 days at USD 40 per day, totaling 
USD 1920. 
MI&E - 2 persons for 36 days at USD 48 per day, totaling USD 
¶3456. 
Travel - 1 person for 12 days at USD 115 per day, totaling 
USD 1380. 
 
 
¶4.  If DRL decides on HRDF funding for this option, we will 
prepare a grant agreement draft with AAPW, the implementing 
organization, per Ref A modified in line with DRL's decision. 
 Please advise.  Please also send an info copy of all cables 
and e-mail on this subject to Consulate General Lagos, 
slugged for Economic Officer Jeff Mazur, who is now handling 
the Corporate Responsibility portfolio for Warri and the rest 
of the Delta. 
MEECE