This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/PPD:DMACINNES AND JDAVIES, NEA/RA:BKEARY, NEA/ARP: 
MMILLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KPAO AFIN KWMN PHUM YM DEMOCRATIC REFORM HUMAN RIGHTS
SUBJECT: FINAL REPORT: DEMOCRACY SMALL GRANT FOR THE WOMEN'S 
INTEGRATION IN DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (WIDA) 
 
REF: A) STATE 187026 B) SANAA 5295 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The Women's Integration in Development 
Association (WIDA) conducted five workshops on "Democracy 
and Human Rights Integration in Local Councils" in five 
Governorates, Al-Baida, Taiz, Mahweet, Lahaj and Sanaa in 
accordance with the terms of their democracy small grant. 
Project's opening of the first workshop was attended by 
Under Secretary of Ministry of Social Affairs, Head and 
Members of WIDA, local council female members and DCM and 
PAS from embassy. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The first workshop was conducted July 23-25, 2002 in 
Radaa city, Al-Baida governorate. The Secretary General of 
Local Council, Sheikh Ali Nusairi of Radaa city, Head of 
Education Center and others attended the workshop. The 
workshop included discussion papers on "Women's Position in 
Islam" And "Participation of Women in the Political and 
Public Life". Other discussion papers included: "Human 
Rights", "Democracy and Women's Role in Democracy 
Development", "Study of Women Rights Under The HRC", "Women 
and Election", "International Agreement to End 
Discrimination Against Women", "Democracy in Yemen and Women 
Economical and Political Empowerment". A total of twenty- 
three participants attended this workshop and were actively 
involved in discussions. 
 
¶3. (U) The second workshop was conducted on July 10-14, 2002 
in Sana'a and attended by the members of the Supreme 
Election Committee, member of the Shura Council, the Under 
Secretary of Social Affairs, the Deputy Director of the 
 
SIPDIS 
Yemeni Women's Union, the DCM and members of the Public 
Affairs Section from embassy. Mrs. Fatima Huraibi, the Head 
of Local Council Committee in Sanaa presented a paper on 
"Women's Participation in Local Council". The discussion 
paper generated much attention from the 28 participants who 
founded the paper inspiring. Participants discussed 
difficulties they face as women local council members as 
they are breaking into the traditional governmental male 
dominant world. Other papers presented were: "Yemeni Women 
and Social Culture", "Support Women to Exercise Their Rights 
and Role in Society", "NGOs Roles in the Development Process 
in a Democratic System", "Disabled Women Rights in the Local 
Council Agenda". 
 
¶4. (U) The third workshop was conducted on July 21-23, 2002 
in Haifan, Taiz. The program included paper presentations 
and group discussion on "Role of Local Council and Democracy 
on Improving Women Issues", "Women's Rights in Islamic 
Laws", "Women Self Empowerment", and "Gender and the Social 
and Political Roles of Men and Women". 
 
¶5.  The fourth workshop was conducted in September 15-17, 
2002 in Mahweet. The Governor of Mahweet, members of the 
local council, heads of political parties, educational and 
social institutions, PAO John Balian and PAS Salwa Sarhi 
from the embassy, attended the workshop opening.  PAO and 
PAS also attended the first session of the workshop which 
included the presentation of a paper by a female member of 
the Shura Council on "Roles of Political Parties in the 
Promotion of Women's Political Participation". Other 
presented papers were "Women Empowerment" and "Local Council 
and Democracy". 
 
¶6. (U) PAO and PAS visited the historical old city of 
Mahweet and were hosted by the governor's deputy where the 
workshop theme was the topic of discussion. The deputy 
expressed his happiness about the workshop and the efforts 
made by WIDA to bring women's issues to the front lines.  He 
also explained that women in Yemen have made a remarkable 
progress in the political life, which makes women's 
participation in Yemen the best in the region. 
 
¶7. (U) The fifth workshop was conducted 23-25 September 2002 
in Lahaj. The workshop's opening day was attended by the 
Lahaj Governor Mansoor Abduljaleel, the Local Council 
General Secretary, the General Manager For Social Affairs, 
members of the local council, NGOs and others. 
Rasheeda Al-Nusairee, WIDA's trainer and deputy director 
presented a paper on "Election and Democracy in Yemen". 
Other papers presented were "Women Issues and Poverty" by 
Dr. Ebtihaj Al-Khaiba an IV participant and a professor at 
Aden University. On the third day, a study case presentation 
of woman who ran for local council elections and won was 
held. The study case presented the woman's experience as a 
candidate, as a member of the local council and a decision 
maker. Participants enjoyed the study case immensely as it 
touched on the most important issue women face when 
participating in politics, which is the resistance women 
face and the limited social settings for women to express 
and participate with men in discussion and decision-making. 
 
¶8. (U) Outcome: Strengths 
 
      Workshops reached 300 women in five governorates and 
     received attention from officials and civil society. 
    Some of the speakers were women local council members 
which gave participants opportunity to listen to their 
experiences and get first hand information of women's 
experience in the public and political life. 
    Several district local council members in each 
governorate attended the workshop and benefited from the 
subjects presented and the discussions. 
    Participants' evaluations of the workshops were very 
positive. Participants acknowledged their dire need to these 
workshops at the governorate levels and the knowledge they 
gain from them as they touch upon very important and current 
women issues. 
    Participation of officials in the workshops showed the 
government's support for women empowerment and development. 
    WIDA's capacity and efficiency in conducting the 
program in five governorates was evident in the 
participants' evaluation of the workshops, media coverage 
and visual and written documentation of the program. 
 
¶9. (U) Outcome: Weaknesses 
 
      In Taiz governorate, the workshop faced resistance from 
     some officials. However, the workshop was well received 
     among the community. 
    In Lahaj, the general secretary was assigned to present 
a paper. But the paper was presented by someone else which 
made discussion of paper subject useless since the general 
secretary was not present to respond. 
 
SIPDIS 
    In Mahweet, participants were less outspoken as the 
area is still conservative and requires more awareness 
programs and advocacy in regards to women participation. 
     HULL