This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR L/OES, INL/LP AND WHA/CAR 
USCG WASHDC FOR LT BRAD KIESERMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIA SNAR PHSA EWWT EAIR JM NL
SUBJECT: MARITIME COUNTERNARCOTICS AGREEMENT 
 
REF: KINGSTON 1948 
 
¶1.  With respect to reftel, Embassy's Global Issues 
Specialist asked the Dutch Foreign Ministry's about the 
status of the MOU, and was referred to Mr. Th. Sneek, deputy 
director for international and legal matters in the Defense 
Ministry.  According to Sneek, there is no such MOU being 
drafted.  He explained that language about law enforcement 
cooperation must be laid down in a treaty and not in an MOU, 
as MOU's are not legally binding in the Netherlands. 
 
¶2.  Rather than drafting a separate bilateral treaty, and 
thus avoid duplication, Sneek recommended using the 
Caribbean regional agreement, which the Netherlands signed 
in Costa Rica on April 10, 2003, as a hook-up for 
U.S./Netherlands Ledet cooperation.  He said that it will be 
much easier to find a formulation within the context of the 
regional treaty, rather than draft a new treaty.  He also 
noted that treaty ratification is a complicated and lengthy 
process in the Kingdom. 
 
¶3.  Sneek, who praised U.S.-Dutch counter-narcotics 
cooperation in the Caribbean, welcomed U.S. reactions to his 
recommendation.  He can be reached directly at 31-70-318 
¶7258.  Embassy POC in this matter is Global Issues 
Specialist Mieke Gronheid at 31-70-3109 269 or 
gronheidmc@state.gov. 
 
Russel