This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 004041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC PREL PHUM OTRA KSEP JO UNGA UN
SUBJECT: 58TH UNGA: DEMARCHE TO JORDAN ON U.S. INITIATIVES 
AND REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON JORDANIAN HIGH-LEVEL 
ATTENDANCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 184648 
     ¶B. STATE 175664 
 
¶1.  A/PolCouns on July 2 delivered ref b talking points to 
Dr. Mousa Braizat, Director of the MFA Department of 
International Organizations, and his assistants Mr. Nayef 
Al-Zaidan and Mr. Ayman Al-Ameri.  A/PolCouns emphasized 
shared U.S.-Jordanian interests with respect to the six U.S. 
initiatives for the General Assembly and urged GOJ support 
for them in New York.  Braizat offered no substantive 
response, but noted prior cooperation between the U.S. and 
Jordan in the General Assembly and said that the GOJ would 
carefully consider each of the proposals.  Braizat further 
mentioned that the Jordanian UN Mission in New York often 
determines how Jordan votes on General Assembly resolutions. 
 
¶2.  With respect to high-level GOJ participation at this 
year's General Assembly, Braizat said that he did not 
anticipate any final decisions on who would attend from Amman 
until perhaps a few weeks before the start of the General 
Assembly.  Braizat did offer, however, that the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs normally headed a small GOJ delegation each 
year.  Post will follow-up with the MFA and report further 
information regarding GOJ attendance at the General Assembly, 
as well as meeting requests, via septel. 
GNEHM