This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 006954 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP MNUC PARM ZP TU
SUBJECT: GOT MORE CONSCIOUS OF THE NEED TO SECURE 
RADIOACTIVE SOURCES FROM IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 293401 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) In response to reftel demarche regarding the 
disposition of radioactive sources from Iraq, on October 6 
MFA Energy Department First Secretary Basak Tug gave 
PolMilOff a verbal, unofficial translation of a report of the 
events of September 28 as provided by the Turkish Atomic 
Energy Council (TAEK).  According to TAEK, portal monitor 
equipment alerted Turkish Customs officials at Habur gate to 
radiation in a "long vehicle" trying to enter Turkey from 
Iraq on September 28.  The vehicle was pulled over and 
remained parked until TAEK officials arrived the same day to 
investigate. The TAEK officials used "ion detectors" made by 
Bikron to measure and determine that there was a radioactive 
source among the scrap metal load.  They then used "field 
spectrometers," also made by Bikron, and determined without 
opening the vehicle that Co-60, Ir-192, and Cs-137 were 
present.  They believed these materials to be used for 
industrial purposes.  The Habur officials then decided that, 
without "any real authority" on the other side of the border 
with which to work, that they should just send the truck back 
into Iraq.  Tug noted that the Habur officials did not notify 
or consult anyone in Ankara at the U/S of Customs, U/S of 
Foreign Trade, or MFA before releasing vehicle.  She 
indicated that border officials had been advised not to 
repeat this oversight. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) PolMilOff noted that, while we appreciated the 
explanation of events, in fact CPA IS the real authority on 
the other side of the border and Embassy Ankara could be a 
conduit to it.  Tug agreed and reiterated that she hoped 
border officials would contact the MFA if such an event were 
to happen again, in which case MFA would certainly contact 
the Embassy. 
EDELMAN