This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
IO/S DAVID LEIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON NL EWWT IMO
SUBJECT: IMO COUNCIL CANDIDACY:  DUTCH REQUEST RECIPROCAL 
SUPPORT 
 
REF: STATE 281005 
 
¶1.     In response to ref demarche, the GONL sent post a 
diplomatic note offering Dutch support for U.S. IMO Council 
candidacy in return for USG support for Dutch candidacy under 
Category B of IMO Council elections. 
 
¶2.     The following is the text of the diplomatic note: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs presents its compliments to 
the Embassy of the U.S.A. and has the honour to confirm 
receipt of the Embassy's Note of 10 October 2003, concerning 
the candidature of the Government of the U.S.A. for 
membership of the IMO Council under Category A, at the 
elections to be held during the 23rd General Assembly in 
November 2003. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the honour to propose an 
arrangement of reciprocal support whereby the Netherlands 
will support the above-mentioned candidature of the 
Government of the U.S.A., on the understanding that the 
Government of the U.S.A. will support the candidature of the 
Netherlands for membership of the IMO Council under Category 
B, at the above-mentioned elections.  The Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs would be grateful for confirmation from the 
Government of the U.S.A. that an arrangement on these lines 
is acceptable. 
 
The Hague, 20 November 2003 
 
¶3.     Post's contacts on IMO Council matters are Bart de 
Jong and Marja Tiemens of the Ministry of Transport, Tel: 31 
70 351-1969. 
SOBEL