null
Diana T Fritz  03/20/2007 04:14:29 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Search Results

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLASSIFIED

SIPDIS
TELEGRAM                                         October 14, 2003


To:       No Action Addressee                                    

Action:   Unknown                                                

From:     AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI (ABU DHABI 4597 - ROUTINE)         

TAGS:     ECON, PREL, PGOV, KPAO                                 

Captions: None                                                   

Subject:  UAE HOSTS FIRST ECONOMIC BUSINESSWOMEN'S FORUM         

Ref:      None                                                   
_________________________________________________________________
UNCLAS        ABU DHABI 04597

SIPDIS
CXABU:
    ACTION: POL 
    INFO:   RSO AMB DCM P/M ECON 
Laser1:
    INFO:   FCS 

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: CDA:RALBRIGHT
DRAFTED: POL:SRADDANT
CLEARED: POL:JMAYBURY ECON: CMCRUMPLER

VZCZCADI647
RR RUEHC RUEHDI RUEHMEP
DE RUEHAD #4597/01 2871336
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141336Z OCT 03
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2075
INFO RUEHDI/AMCONSUL DUBAI 3476
RUEHMEP/MEPIC COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABU DHABI 004597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/FO, NEA/ARP, G/IWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PREL PGOV KWMN KPAO KMPI TC
SUBJECT: UAE HOSTS FIRST ECONOMIC BUSINESSWOMEN'S FORUM 
 
REF:  ABU DHABI 4402 
 
¶1. Summary:  A U.S. delegation from the Embassy and the 
Department attended the First Economic Businesswomen's 
Forum, held in Abu Dhabi, October 7-10, under the patronage 
of Shaykha Fatima bint Mubarak, wife of UAE President Shaykh 
Zayed bin Sultan.  Shaykha Fatima did not attend the forum. 
Touted as the first women's forum that seeks to carve out a 
more active economic role for women in the Arab world, the 
conference drew approximately 600 attendees (significantly 
more than the 400 expected) representing several Arab 
countries, one South Asian country, Europe and the U.S.  To 
many of the participants' disappointment, the forum lacked 
both substance and structure once the introductory remarks 
from several prominent speakers concluded.  There were no 
new reports or statistical updates offered. 
 
¶2. As with many conferences, however, the real action took 
place on the margins of the official meetings.  U.S. 
officials participated in several important side meetings 
with key UAE contacts.  Forum organizers expressed the hope 
that other attendees also used the event to gain networking 
contacts, as well as a shot of entrepreneurial confidence to 
take back to their respective countries.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. The forum's theme was "Business Women Projects: Between 
Reality and Ambition."  Opening remarks from UAE First Lady 
Shaykha Fatima, who does not appear with mixed male and 
female audiences, were delivered in her absence by a 
personal assistant.  The Ambassador read remarks by NEA/DAS 
Cheney, who was unable to travel to the UAE.  Senior 
Coordinator for International Women's Issues Charlotte 
Ponticelli also offered introductory comments, which were 
well-received.  Ponticelli took the opportunity to discuss 
the Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) and how it 
will assist women entrepreneurs in partner countries.  Other 
speakers included the president of the Council for Arab 
Business Women, president of the UAE Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry, and a representative from the Arab League. 
 
¶4. Key presenters in the working sessions included Princess 
Basma bint Talal of the Jordanian National Women Affairs 
Committee, Saudi Princess Reem bint Al Waleed bin Talal of 
the Kingdom Holding Company, Deputy Parliamentarian Bahia Al 
Hariri from Lebanon, and Mrs. Afaf Zainalabedin of the First 
Islamic Investment Bank of Bahrain.  The majority of 
speakers presented theoretical papers covering topics such 
as "Investment Observing Duty and Rights," "Our Enterprises 
and the Global Investment," "Investment in the Arab World," 
and "Difficulties Facing Women in Business."  One 
reoccurring theme was the effect of globalization on the 
Arab world.  Speakers repeatedly warned against sacrificing 
Arab culture to "Western" economic influences.  The more 
emphatic the warnings, it seemed, the louder the approval 
from the audience.  Some speakers clearly instructed 
participants to take steps to preserve their culture through 
partnering with each other, to avoid becoming "victims" of 
development (Note: Sponsors of the conference included Shell 
and Chevron.  End Note.). 
 
¶5. There was little solid "how-to" advice offered to 
entrepreneurs in the audience.  Some disappointed 
participants discussed this deficiency between working 
sessions, while others pointed it out during the forum's 
sole question-and-answer session.  The hall was packed on 
the first morning.  However, as the day progressed, 
attendance dwindled, and the second day's working sessions 
were sparsely attended.  The remainder of the conference's 
events were social in nature, including a tour (which was 
cancelled), a jewelry show, shopping and dinner in Dubai. 
 
¶6. Arguably, side meetings were the most beneficial events 
of the forum.  In addition to a one-hour meeting with the 
Ambassador, Ponticelli, Senior Advisor David Pollock, 
Econoff and Poloff met with key Emirati contacts from the 
Executive Board of the National Businesswomen's Committee 
and the General Women's Union.  Ponticelli also had several 
opportunities to meet informally with participants who 
approached her with questions about USG policies, and with 
suggestions for MEPI projects.  Additionally, Econoff and 
Poloff were able to strengthen Embassy working relationships 
with important Emirati contacts. 
 
¶7. One of the ideas that may prove to be worthy of MEPI 
consideration is the establishment of a U.S./UAE 
businesswomen's network, linking UAE entrepreneurs with 
established U.S. businesswomen who would serve as mentors. 
This network could also be used to bring prominent U.S. 
businesswomen to the UAE as speakers or to hold workshops. 
Another idea that could qualify under the PAO MEPI pillar 
involves the establishment of U.S./Arab educational centers. 
The woman who introduced this idea agreed to provide the 
Embassy further information about her plan.  At another side 
meeting, a prominent Emirati businesswoman with links to an 
organization that promotes stress-reduction through 
breathing and meditation requested technical assistance from 
Ponticelli to promote her program, at no expense to USG, in 
Iraq. 
 
¶8. Ponticelli received red-carpet treatment from conference 
organizers throughout her visit.  A high-profile Emirati 
businesswoman escorted her both at the conference and to 
social events afterwards, and she met with Arab 
businesswomen at the highest levels.  At all functions, she 
sat in VIP areas and received the same top-level courtesies 
reserved for other non-royal dignitaries. 
 
¶9. Ponticelli did not have the opportunity to clear this 
cable before her departure. 
 
ALBRIGHT