This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 002413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV AND DS/DSS/ITA, DS/IP/EAP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL VM CTERR
SUBJECT:  UPDATE ON ALLEGED ANTI-SRV "TERRORIST" IN U.S. 
 
REF:  02 HANOI 1731 
 
¶1.  (U)  MFA Americas Department Deputy Director Pham Van 
Que presented to A/DCM on September 19 a non-paper on 
alleged "terrorist" Nguyen Huu Chanh, who has been the 
subject of an earlier diplomatic note (reftel) and other 
communications.  Que made no formal request and there was 
no diplomatic note accompanying the information, but Que 
indicated that he wished the USG to consider "additional" 
information.  (Note: apparently, new references to the 
opening of a "Revolutionary Government of Free Vietnam" on 
January 1, 2003 and founding of a "Vietnam National Party" 
on August 17, 2003.  end note).  The document reiterates an 
earlier request via Interpol for Chanh's arrest, as well as 
claims of Chanh's involvement in 2001 bombing attempts of 
Vietnamese embassies in Manila and Bangkok. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Action request:  Embassy would welcome an update 
on any investigation into Chanh's alleged "terrorist" 
activities as well as on the current status of Vo Van Duc, 
who was due for extradition to Thailand for the 2001 
bombing attempt. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Begin text 
Nguyen Huu Chanh (name at birth: Nguyen Hoang Dan; nick 
names: Nguyen Huu Danh, Bao Long and Nguyen Anh Tuan). 
Date of Birth: January 1, 1950 in Phu Cat, Binh Dinh, 
Vietnam (other documents also identified year of birth as 
1949 and 1951); 
Nationality: Vietnamese, holder of U.S. Green Card 
No. A.27344105 issued on January 19th 1992; 
 
Addresses of his residence have been referred to as 
follows: 
 
-    16220 N. 7th Suite 2028, Phoenix, AZ 85022. 
-    13282 Earle Dr., Garden Grove, CA 92644. 
 Tel: (914) 638-9527. 
-    7400 Center Ave, Suite 108, Huntington Beach, CA 
¶92647. 
  Tel: (714) 379-5250. 
-    12755 Brookhurst, Suite 104, Garden Grove, CA 92840. 
  Tel: (714) 638-9990. 
 
1995, Nguyen Huu Chanh set up the so-called "Revolutionary 
Government of Free Vietnam" based in 12755 Brookhurst Suite 
104, Garden Grove, California, U.S.A.  Since then, Chanh 
and his accomplices have returned to Thailand and Cambodia 
many times to recruit and train people to produce, use 
mines and bombs, purchase grenades and explosives for 
terrorist activities against Vietnam. Particularly, since 
1999, Chanh has organized, instructed, and assigned 26 
gangs (of 3 to 5 persons each) from Thailand and Cambodia 
to carry explosives, mines, grenades and other explosive 
devices to Vietnam for terrorist purposes. These activities 
can be specified as follows: 
 
- In March 1999, Chanh asked the gang of Tran Van Duc and 
Huynh Buu Tran to carry explosives to Vietnam for terrorist 
acts in Can Tho and Dong Thap provinces. 
 
- In April 1999, Chanh assigned the gangs of Tran Thi Hue, 
Nguyen Van Phuong, Nguyen Van Hung, Nguyen Van Ty and 6 
others, the gang of Son Tam and Danh Huong, and the gang of 
Chan Khuu and To Van Hong to carry explosives, mines and 
other explosive facilities to Vietnam for destructive and 
terrorist acts in places such as downtown parks, flower- 
gardens, post offices, statues at the Reunification Hall in 
Can Tho, Dong Thap provinces and Ho Chi Minh City. 
 
- From December 1999 to February 2000, Chanh sent his 
accomplices named: Huynh Anh Tri, Huynh Anh Tu, Nguyen Ngoc 
Phuong, Van Ngoc Hien, Le Ngoc Anh Tuan, Ly Ngoc Ha, Pham 
Anh Tuan, Nguyen Thanh Van, Tran Kim Huong, Do Van 
Thai and Tran Hoang Giang to bring 25 kg of explosives, 25 
detonators, delayed action fuses and 2 remote control bomb 
devices to Vietnam for acts of terrorism in Can Tho, 
Dong Thap provinces and Ho Chi Minh City. 
 
- In March 2000, Chanh instructed his accomplices to 
explode gas tanks at the ceremony in memory of Huynh Phu So- 
Head of Vietnam's Hoa Hao religion. 
 
- In August 2000, Chanh asked Son Nguyen Thanh Dien to 
bring 3 grenades to Vietnam for the purpose of causing 
explosions at the Post and Telecommunications Center in Ho 
Chi Minh City. 
 
- In June 2001, Chanh organized and instructed Vo Van Duc 
(or Nguyen Van Trang, John Nguyen Trang) and Phan Nguyen 
Thanh Hien Sy to conduct a terrorist bombing at the 
Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, Thailand. 
 
- In August 2001, Chanh organized and instructed Nguyen Tan 
Vinh and Huynh Ngoc Thuan to plan a terrorist bombing at 
the Chancery of the Vietnamese Embassy in Manila, the 
Philippines. 
 
- On June 29 and 30 2002, Chanh organized "Conference of 
the Vietnamese National Alliance" in Anaheim, California to 
continue rallying forces for terrorist activities against 
Vietnam. 
 
- Nguyen Huu Chanh organized the opening ceremony of the so- 
called "Revolutionary Government of Free Vietnam" in the 
USA on January 1, 2003; organized "The General Conference" 
in Germany in April; "Vietnam National Party" in the USA on 
August 17, 2003. 
 
The Vietnamese Police have prevented the above-said 
activities and arrested dozens of them with 40 kg of 
explosives, 30 detonators, 3 grenades, 4 remote control 
bomb devices, and many delayed action fuses. In May 2001, 
Vietnam brought to trial 37 persons arrested on charges of 
terrorist activities under the instructions and 
organization of Nguyen Huu Chanh. 
 
Based on the available documents and evidence, in 
conformity with Article 84 of the Penal Code of Vietnam, on 
3 May 1999, the Vietnamese police issued an All-Points 
Bulletin against Nguyen Huu Chanh for terrorist activities. 
On 15 June 1999, the Interpol Office announced an 
international All-Points Bulletin (Control No. A-431. /6- 
1999) against Nguyen Hun Chanh for weapon smuggling and 
terrorism.  On September 10, 2002, Interpol Vietnam sent 
Notice No. 912/VPI (T2) to the U.S. Interpol informing 
evidences of the committing crimes of Chanh and requested 
the U.S. to arrest and hand Chanh over to Vietnam to bring 
him to justice, and to abolish the so-called "Revolutionary 
Government of Free Vietnam" headed by Nguyen Hun Chanh. 
 
Until now, there has been close cooperation between Vietnam 
and Thailand in preventing terrorist acts of Chanh.  On 
August 10, 1999, The Thai Committee for Examining 
Foreigners in Danger for Security and Society decided to 
rank Nguyen HuU Chanh and his gang to the list of persons 
who may cause harm for society or may create dangers for 
Thai national security due to their acts of establishing 
revolutionary front and army forces in Trat province 
(Thailand). On October 6, 1999, Thai Minister for Internal 
Security had order No. 397/2542 prohibiting those people 
from entry permit to Thai territory according to Section 16 
of 1999 Immigration Law. 
end text 
BURGHARDT