This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON MIDDLE EAST 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- Lead story in all papers today, May 21, focuses 
preparations for the Jordanian parliamentary elections 
as the candidate registration for the elections closed 
at 821 candidates yesterday.  Papers also highlight 
America's warning of continued threats in Saudi 
Arabia.  Majority of editorial commentary focus on the 
elections. 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "Operations here and there" 
 
Daily columnist Urayb Rintawi writes on the op-ed page 
of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(05/21):  "There is a strange coincidence of time 
between two phenomena that have never coincided 
before: the wave of operations in the West Bank and 
Gaza and Israel, and the wave of Al-Qa'eda operations 
in Riyadh and Casablanca..  It is a purely 
circumstantial coincidence of timing, nothing more and 
nothing less.  Yet, this coincidence carries with some 
disturbing indications, namely that it can be employed 
to better serve Israel's objective of `Talbanizing' 
the Palestinian Authority, of linking the Palestinian 
struggle with international terrorism, and of turning 
Israel's racist-based aggression and colonization into 
another chapter of the legitimate international war 
against terrorism..  Once again, the recent wave of 
operations in Palestine and the Arab world shows that 
combating violence, terrorism and extremism and 
containing the anti-peace movement cannot be achieved 
by military and security means alone, rather by 
addressing the faults, namely the occupation, the 
oppression, the frustration and the desperation." 
GNEHM