This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 BRASILIA 003982 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/MTA/MST AND WHA/BSC 
USTR FOR G. BLUE AND SUE CRONIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EFIN ECON EINV PGOV BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: UPDATES TO 2003 NTE 
 
Ref: A) STATE 310953  B) JADAMS/LYANG EMAIL 
 
¶1. Per Ref A, this cable transmits post's draft of the 
2003 NTE.  A separate copy is being emailed directly to 
USTR (Cronin and Blue). 
 
IMPORT POLICIES 
 
Brazil's arithmetic average applied tariff was an 
estimated 11.5 percent in 2003.  Brazil currently 
maintains no applied tariff rates in excess of 35 percent, 
but does have safeguard measures in place for some 
imports, such as toys.  For example, Brazil imposes 
tariffs between 4.5-16.5% on wood products and 22% on 
motorcycles.  In April 2002, the Brazilian government 
approved a new tax law that dramatically increased the 
duty on imported advertising materials and discriminates 
between domestic and foreign producers.  A number of 
imports are prohibited, including various used goods such 
as machinery, foreign blood products, refurbished medical 
equipment, automobiles, clothing, and other consumer 
goods. 
 
Brazil and its MERCOSUR partners, Argentina, Paraguay and 
Uruguay, implemented the MERCOSUR Common External Tariff 
(CET) on January 1, 1995.  The CET currently covers 9,626 
items, with tariffs mostly ranging between zero and 21.5 
percent.  Within the CET, certain sectors are treated 
separately and are organized on special lists.  The list 
for informatics and telecommunication goods contains 427 
items with tariffs in 2002 ranging between zero and 26 
percent; a tariff phase-down schedule should bring the top 
tariff down to 16 by 2006.  The automotive list covers 55 
items (vehicles and parts) with a tariff rate of 35 
percent; Brazil has negotiated automotive agreements with 
third countries, which provide duty-free treatment within 
quotas.  A MERCOSUR suspension of duties ranging from 2 to 
15.5 percent on some 550 pharmaceutical products has been 
extended until December 31, 2003.  Although the CET was 
meant to be a comprehensive, common tariff schedule, 
MERCOSUR countries have agreed to allow exceptions. 
Brazil has 100 exceptions to the CET, with tariffs 
reaching as high as 55 percent on coconuts and peaches. 
In addition, after consulting with its MERCOSUR neighbors, 
in November 1997 Brazil implemented a temporary three- 
percentage point increase on most CET tariff items.  For 
almost all products, this additional tariff was reduced to 
1.5 percent by the end of 2002, with its total elimination 
expected at the end of 2003.  Currently, 3450 CET items 
are excluded, including 1152 capital goods.  The CET 
remains a significant barrier to increased U.S. exports of 
agricultural products, distilled spirits, and computer and 
telecommunications equipment.  Brazil prohibits the 
importation of second hand consumer goods.  In addition, 
significant barriers exist to U.S. textile exports.  In 
particular, Brazil applies additional import taxes and 
charges that can effectively double the actual cost of 
importing textile products into Brazil. 
 
Virtually all imports from its MERCOSUR partners enter 
Brazil duty-free.  Notable exceptions are automobiles and 
automobile parts, which are subject to out-of-quota 
tariffs, and refined sugar, which is assessed a 17.5 
percent tariff.  Two-way trade between Brazil and its 
MERCOSUR partners increased by 25 percent during January 
to October 2003 compared with the same period a year 
earlier, evidence of continuing economic improvement that 
began in 2002.  In a December 16, 2003 summit, MERCOSUR 
leaders reaffirmed their commitment to strengthen the 
customs union and work to fully integrate the MERCOSUR 
common market by 2006.  MERCOSUR plans to finalize free- 
trade agreements with three Andean countries, Colombia, 
Venezuela, and Ecuador.  Peru and Bolivia are currently 
associate members. 
 
Import Licensing/Customs Valuation 
 
The Secretariat of Foreign Trade (SECEX) implemented a 
computerized trade documentation system (SISCOMEX) in 
early 1997 to handle import licensing.  All importers must 
register with SECEX to access SISCOMEX; registration 
requirements are onerous, including a minimum capital 
requirement.  In addition, fees are assessed for each 
import statement submitted through SISCOMEX.  As a general 
rule, imports into Brazil fall within an "automatic import 
license" process.  Originally, Brazil's non-automatic 
import licensing system was used only in cases of specific 
imports that require special authorization from specific 
ministries/agencies: beverages (Ministry of Agriculture); 
pharmaceuticals (Ministry of Health); arms and munitions 
(National Defense Ministry); etc.  In 1998, the Brazilian 
government stopped publishing a list of products subject 
to non-automatic licenses; the only method available now 
for determining if a product requires an import license is 
to check the SISCOMEX system, which is available only to 
registered importers.  Under Brazil's non-automatic import 
licensing system, U.S. suppliers have no means of finding 
out in advance which products require import licenses and 
whether they are subject to minimum price and payment 
terms as a condition of receiving a license. 
 
Under Brazilian customs regulations, a "gray line" process 
exists for enhanced scrutiny of suspected fraudulent 
imports.  This process is opaque and burdens some 
categories of U.S. exports.  A related concern has been 
the possible use of the gray line process to impose 
minimum reference prices.  In November 1999, the United 
States actively participated as an interested third party 
in EU WTO consultations on the issue, and in July 2000, 
the United States held its own WTO consultations with 
Brazil. The Brazilian Government denies the use of minimum 
reference prices and reportedly has modified its customs 
regime in response to these consultations. 
 
Product registrations from the Ministry of Health are 
required for imported processed food products and food 
supplement products, and as of March 1, 2000, the term of 
validity for registration was shortened.  Registration 
fees for these imports, as well as for medical and 
pharmaceutical products, have increased significantly. 
The U.S. Government also has received complaints relating 
to Brazilian practices that lead to non-transparent 
preferences for Brazilian products in procurement bids for 
government and nonprofit hospitals, and cause bias against 
the import of refurbished medical equipment when 
domestically produced "similars" exist. Implementation of 
such import measures continues to have a negative impact 
on U.S. exports, especially given the high tariffs on 
medical equipment.  Although some progress in increasing 
the transparency of the process was made at the end of 
2001, problems for U.S. exporters still exist. U.S. 
companies continue to complain of a variety of customs- 
related non-tariff barriers. 
 
The U.S. Government has received complaints that the ICMS 
value-added tax collected by individual states is 
sometimes set to favor local companies, constituting a 
non-tariff trade barrier.   Similarly, some U.S. companies 
have raised concerns about the arbitrary application of 
various non-automatic import licensing procedures, such as 
authorizations from the Federal Police and the Nuclear 
Regulatory Agency. 
 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING AND CERTIFICATION 
 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures 
 
Progress has been made in the area of sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) measures.  On March 15, 2001, the 
Ministry of Agriculture lifted the ban on U.S. Soft Red 
Winter, Hard Red Spring, and Hard Red Winter wheat shipped 
from non-west coast ports.  The ban remains on Durum and 
White wheats and wheat from the states of Washington, 
Oregon, Idaho, California, Nevada, and Arizona due to 
phytosanitary concerns.  The U.S.  Government continues to 
work with the Brazilian government to resolve the 
remaining import restrictions. 
 
Despite progress, SPS measures remain significant barriers 
in several cases.  Brazil continues to prohibit the entry 
of poultry and poultry products from the United States 
based on an alleged lack of reciprocity, contrary to WTO 
rules which dictate that sanitary and phytosanitary 
determinations be based upon sufficient scientific 
evidence.   Attempts to import seed potatoes into Brazil 
have been blocked by unresolved permit issues based upon a 
delayed and non-transparent pest risk assessment (PRA) 
before commercial market access is granted.  Brazilian 
legislation also bans the importation of beef produced 
with growth hormones; however, beef imports from the 
United States have been allowed on a waiver basis since 
¶1991. 
 
Biotechnology 
 
The biotechnology debate has captured public attention in 
Brazil with frequent and polemical reports in the press 
presenting various aspects of the issue.  Regulation of 
the biotech sector remains essentially frozen because of a 
1998 court case that is still pending in a federal court 
in Brasilia, filed by environmental NGOs against the use 
of Monsanto's Roundup Ready soybean variety.  The case 
addresses not only the requirement to conduct 
environmental impact studies on GMO products, but also the 
constitutional authority of the Government's CTNBio 
commission to approve biotech products. 
 
In the absence of a definitive court ruling on this case, 
President Lula made considerable progress in 2003 towards 
a new legal framework for production and marketing of 
biotech soybean crops.  Law 10,814 was enacted on December 
15, 2003 after being approved by Congress, and legalizes 
the planting and marketing biotech soybean crops for the 
2003/2004 harvest.   On October 31, 2003, President Lula 
sent to Congress the long-awaited draft of a Biosecurity 
Law that will provide a long-term regulatory regime for 
the biotech sector.  The current text of the bill 
envisions a complicated mechanism for approval of biotech 
products by a national commission attached to the 
President's office that would consider political and 
economic, as well as scientific factors.  It is likely 
that the bill will undergo substantial revision before 
passage, which is expected in April 2004. 
 
On April 24, 2003 the Brazilian Government published 
Decree Number 4680, which formally implemented the 
provisions of a 1990 law (law 8,078 of September 1990) 
that requires labeling of GMOs.  The decree requires 
labeling of GMOs and products containing GMOs, including 
meats from animals fed with GMO feed.  The label must 
include a special logo created by the Ministry of Justice 
in October 2003.  The requirement does not apply to 
packaged food products containing less than one percent of 
genetically modified organisms. 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
 
Brazil is not a signatory to the WTO Plurilateral 
Agreement on Government Procurement, and   transparency in 
the procurement process could be improved. Remaining 
limitations on foreign capital participation in 
procurement bids can reportedly impair access for 
potential service providers in the energy and construction 
sectors.  Brazilian federal, state and municipal 
governments, as well as related agencies and companies, in 
general follow a "buy national" policy.  Although Law 8666 
of 1993, which covers most government procurement other 
than informatics and telecommunications, requires 
nondiscriminatory treatment for all bidders regardless of 
the nationality or origin of product or service, the law's 
implementing regulations allow consideration of non-price 
factors giving preferences to certain goods produced in 
Brazil and stipulating local content requirements for 
eligibility for fiscal benefits.  Decree 1070 of March 
1994, which regulates the procurement of information 
technology goods and services, requires federal agencies 
and parastatal entities to give preference to locally 
produced computer products based on a complicated and 
nontransparent price/technology matrix.  However, Brazil 
permits foreign companies to compete in any procurement- 
related multilateral development bank loans and opens 
selected procurements to international tenders. 
 
EXPORT SUBSIDIES 
 
The Government of Brazil offers a variety of tax, tariff, 
and financing incentives to encourage production for 
export and the use of Brazilian inputs in exported 
products.  An export credit program known as PROEX was 
established in 1991.  PROEX is intended to equalize 
domestic and international interest rates for export 
financing and to directly finance production of tradable 
goods.   Exporters enjoy exemption from withholding tax 
for remittances overseas for loan payments and marketing, 
as well as from the financial operations tax for deposit 
receipts on export products.  Several PROEX programs have 
been found to be countervailable under U.S. law in the 
context of specific countervailing duty cases.  In 1999, a 
WTO panel found PROEX interest equalization payments used 
to finance the sale of regional aircraft manufactured in 
Brazil to be a prohibited export subsidy.  The WTO 
Appellate Body upheld this finding.  The Government of 
Brazil states that it has modified PROEX so as to bring it 
into conformity with WTO subsidy rules.  Canada challenged 
this position in the WTO, but subsequently reached a 
negotiated settlement with Brazil, obviating the need for 
a WTO ruling on the merits of the case.  Changes to PROEX 
were announced most recently in 1999, expanding the 
program.  In 2003, roughly $808 million was budgeted for 
PROEX, with $400 million slated for equalization and $408 
million for direct financing.  Actual spending on PROEX 
during 2003 is expected to have been about half of the 
amount budgeted. 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
 
Patents and Trademarks 
 
Brazil's industrial property law, covering patents and 
trademarks, took effect in May 1997.  The law improved 
most aspects of Brazil's industrial property regime, 
providing patent protection for pharmaceutical products 
and processes, agrochemical products and other inventions. 
However, concerns continue about a provision that 
prohibits importation as a means of satisfying the 
requirement that the patent be "worked" in that country. 
This issue was the subject of a Dispute Settlement 
proceeding at the WTO, which was terminated without 
prejudice in June 2001. The dispute was terminated based 
on Brazil's commitment to hold talks with the U.S. should 
it deem necessary in the future to grant a compulsory 
license for failure to work a patent. 
 
On December 14, 1999, the Brazilian Government issued a 
Provisional Measure that became Law 10,196 in 2001, which 
includes some problematic provisions, including a 
requirement that Health Ministry approval be obtained 
prior to the issuance of a pharmaceutical patent. This 
would appear to conflict with Article 27 of the TRIPS 
Agreement, and U.S. officials have raised this concern 
with their Brazilian counterparts.  "Pipeline" protection 
is provided for inventions not previously patentable in 
Brazil because of limitations on patentable subject 
matter, if these inventions were patented in another 
country and not marketed in Brazil.  While Brazil's patent 
office, the National Institute for Industrial Property 
(INPI), is addressing its backlog of both pipeline and 
regular patent applications, the resources and support 
necessary to effectively and consistently manage the 
processing of patent applications still appear to be 
insufficient. As of December 2003, industry sources 
reported that INPI had granted fifteen pipeline patents 
and fifty-seven regularly filed pharmaceutical patents. At 
the same time, unauthorized copies of pharmaceutical 
products have received sanitary registrations relying on 
undisclosed tests and other confidential data, in apparent 
violation of TRIPS Article 39.3. 
 
Following the WTO agreement on access to medicines in 
September 2003, President Lula issued a decree revising 
the implementation of Article 71 of Brazil's 1996 patent 
law, which governs the granting of compulsory licenses in 
cases of national emergency or public interest.  The 
decree essentially allows for the importation of copies of 
medicines from producer countries where patent protection 
does not exist in cases where local production of the 
medicine in not feasible.  The Brazilian government has 
yet to make use of the decree, but has publicly stated its 
intention to do so as a last resort in price negotiations 
with pharmaceutical companies supplying antiretrovirals to 
the country's National AIDS Program. 
 
On December 17, 2002, the Brazilian Congress passed Law 
10,603 on data confidentiality.  The law covers 
pharmaceuticals for veterinary use, fertilizers, 
agrotoxins, their components and related products; the law 
does not cover pharmaceuticals for human use.   The law 
provides data protection for only 10 years from the date 
of registration with the competent regulatory authority 
for products utilizing new chemical molecules or new 
biological organisms or until the first release of the 
information by the registration owner, with a minimum 
guaranteed period of protection for one year.  For 
products not utilizing new molecule or organisms, the 
period of protection is five years or until the first 
release of information with a one-year minimum period of 
protection.  Data demanded by the regulatory authority 
after registration will be protected for the duration of 
the protection period granted to the data used to gain the 
registration, or for one year after being presented, 
whichever is longer.  If the product is not commercialized 
within two years of the date of registration, third 
parties may request use of the data for registration 
purposes.  The regulatory authority may make compulsory 
use of the data in cases of national emergency or in 
certain circumstances relating to unfair competition. 
 
The 1997 industrial property law also added provisions for 
the protection of "well-known" trademarks, but contains a 
long list of categories of marks that cannot be 
registered. U.S. industry has expressed concern with the 
continued high level of counterfeiting in Brazil. A bill 
(PL_1787) on the protection of layout designs of 
integrated circuits (required by TRIPS) was introduced in 
April 1996 and is still progressing through committees 
within the Brazilian Congress. 
 
Copyrights 
 
A copyright bill that included amendments to bring Brazil 
into compliance with the Berne Convention and TRIPS was 
signed by President Cardoso in February 1998. A software 
law was signed by President Cardoso that same month, 
protecting computer programs as "literary works," 
increasing the term of protection to 50 years, and making 
software infringement a fiscal and an intellectual 
property crime. Copyright enforcement in Brazil continues 
to be uneven, and losses from piracy remain significant. 
As a result of this concern, on January 10, 2001, the U.S. 
Government accepted a petition, submitted by the 
International Intellectual Property Alliance, to review 
the GSP status of Brazil.  This petition was reviewed as 
part of the 2003 Annual Generalized System of Preferences 
Product and Country Eligibility Review.  A Country 
Practices Review of Brazil was held in October 2003. The 
U.S. industry reports that in 2002 its trade losses from 
copyright piracy in Brazil were over $771 million, the 
largest amount of losses due to copyright piracy in the 
hemisphere. 
 
Problems have been particularly acute with respect to 
sound recordings and videocassettes, and virtually all 
audiocassettes sold are pirated copies. Brazil accounts 
for over half of the market for sound recordings in Latin 
America and is one of the world's largest markets for 
videos. Vigorous industry and Brazilian Government anti- 
piracy campaigns have had a positive impact and general 
awareness among the populace has increased significantly. 
 
In June 2003, the Brazilian Congress launched a 
Parliamentary Investigative Commission (CPI) on Piracy, 
which has gained wide support from industry for its 
action-oriented nature, as well as its willingness to 
address the official corruption inherent in piracy. 
Several Deputies on the CPI have pressed law enforcement 
officials to achieve notable apprehensions of perpetrators 
and counterfeited goods ranging from cigarettes to CDs. 
The CPI's 6-month mandate has recently been extended.  An 
outgrowth of the CPI, a Congressional caucus on piracy and 
tax evasion was formed in September 2003.   Efforts in 
2003 resulted in many prosecutions, but the number of 
convictions for intellectual property rights violations 
remains too low to act as a deterrent. While anti-piracy 
actions in 2003 resulted in several large seizures of 
pirated CDs, the sound recording industry estimates that 
the piracy rate for CDs in 2002 was 55 percent. Even with 
piracy raids and more prosecutions, the number of cases 
prosecuted and sentenced in Brazilian courts remains low, 
frustrating efforts at deterrence.  In July 2003, 
President Lula signed a law that doubled the minimum 
penalty for copyright violations.  The law also codifies 
procedures to seize and destroy contraband and gives 
judges authority to dispose of seized goods to ensure they 
will not be used for commercial purposes.   Brazil has 
increased inspections at border crossings increased, but 
significant amounts of pirated material continue to enter 
Brazil from Paraguay. 
 
The Federal Government of Brazil to date has not given 
police adequate tools or training to effectively enforce 
the law. Further, fines provided for in the penal code are 
too insignificant to create a true deterrent; and the 
court and judicial process is often unresponsive and slow. 
The generally inefficient nature of Brazil's courts and 
judicial system has complicated the enforcement of 
intellectual property rights.  The Brazilian Government is 
working to streamline the judicial process.  In early 
2001, the Government created an interagency IPR committee, 
coordinated by the Ministry of Justice, to improve anti- 
piracy enforcement.  After two years of very limited 
activity due to lack of resources and the 2002 national 
elections, the committee made progress in 2003 with a 
national public awareness campaign and the start of IPR 
training at the National Federal Police Training Academy. 
Brazil has not yet ratified the WIPO Treaties on Copyright 
and Performances and Phonograms. 
SERVICES BARRIERS 
 
Telecommunications 
Privatization within the telecommunications sector, which 
is based on the General Telecommunications Law of 1997, 
has presented regulatory challenges.  In the fixed-line 
sector, interconnection charges and other incumbency 
advantages have provided strong barriers for entry, and 
the companies created during a transitional duopoly stage 
have not fared well.  There was also heavy involvement on 
the judicial side during 2002 and 2003, as some incumbent 
companies used court injunctions to forestall competition. 
 
Brazil has not yet implemented its original WTO basic 
telecommunications commitments.  In 2001, Brazil withdrew 
its schedule of commitments in view of concerns raised by 
certain WTO members that it maintained the right of the 
Brazilian President to revoke concessions in the case of 
national emergency, in contravention of the WTO Basic 
Telecommunications Agreement.  This presidential right is 
contained in Brazil's 1997 General Law on 
Telecommunications and is inscribed in Brazil's 
constitution.  Brazil has not sought the constitutional 
change required to allow a revision of its schedule. 
Nonetheless, the current regulatory environment generally 
reflects commitments made by Brazil under the WTO Basic 
Telecommunications Agreement. 
 
Maritime 
 
The Government of Brazil considers the bilateral Maritime 
Agreement signed in October 1999 to be expired.  Bilateral 
consultations should result in a new agreement in 2004, 
and in the interim the regulatory agencies of Brazil and 
the United States have agreed to continue implementing the 
provisions of the 1999 agreement on a reciprocal basis. 
Key provisions of this agreement commit the parties to 
afford fair and nondiscriminatory access for national-flag 
carriers and third-flag carriers to competition on 
commercial cargo and provides equal and nondiscriminatory 
access to government cargos.  A 25 percent merchant marine 
tax on freight puts U.S. agricultural products at a 
competitive disadvantage to MERCOSUR products. 
 
Audio Visual Services 
 
Foreign ownership of cable companies is limited to 49 
percent.  The foreign owner must have a headquarters in 
Brazil and have had a presence in the country for the 
prior 10 years.  Foreign cable and satellite television 
operators are subject to an 11 percent remittance tax; 
however the tax can be avoided if the programmer invests 3 
percent of its remittances in co-production of Brazilian 
audio-visual services.  National cable and satellite 
operators are subject to a fixed title levy on foreign 
content and foreign advertising released on their 
channels. 
 
Provisional Measure 2,228 1/01 and later Law 10,454 aim to 
promote the national film industry through creation of the 
National Film Agency (ANCINE) and through various 
regulatory measures. Under Law 10,454, published on May 
14, 2002, a fixed title levy is imposed on the release of 
foreign films in theaters, foreign home entertainment 
products, and foreign programming for broadcast 
television.  Remittances to foreign producers of 
audiovisual works are subject to a 25 percent tax. 
Brazilian distributors of foreign films are subject to a 
levy equal to an 11 percent tax of their withholding 
taxes.  This tax, called the CONDECINE (Contribution to 
the Development of a National Film Industry), is waived 
for the Brazilian distributor if the producer of the 
foreign audiovisual work agrees to invest an amount equal 
to 70 percent of the tax on their remittances in co- 
productions with Brazilian film companies.  The CONDECINE 
tax also levied on any foreign cinematographic or 
videophonographic advertisement.  The fee may vary 
according to the advertising content and the transmission 
segment. 
 
Brazil also requires that 100 percent of all films and 
television shows be printed locally.  Importation of color 
prints for the theatrical and television markets is 
prohibited.  A theatrical screen quota for local films is 
maintained at 28 days per calendar year.  Quotas on 
domestic titles for home video distributors, while not 
currently enforced, present another potential hindrance to 
commerce. 
 
Foreign firms had been prohibited from owning capital in 
the "open broadcast" (non-cable) television sector. 
However, in October 2002, President Cardoso issued 
Provisional Measure 70, which was subsequently approved by 
the Congress, which permits up to 30 percent foreign 
ownership in Brazilian media.  This law covers print as 
well as the open television sector.  Open television 
companies also have a regulation requiring that 80 percent 
of their programming content be domestic in origin.  All 
broadcast media material that enters the country must pass 
through the Ministry of Justice, which retains rights to 
censure and edit content. 
 
Express Delivery Services 
 
A bill (PL 1491/99) that would reorganize the National 
Postal System remains under discussion in the Brazilian 
Congress.  The current proposal creates a regulatory 
agency for postal services as well as a new Postal Company 
of Brazil, owned and operated by the federal government. 
Although the bill would end the government monopoly over 
postal services after a ten-year period, it would also 
create a monopoly on the delivery of certain types of 
correspondence and parcels that are not now subject to 
regulation, such as express delivery packages, thereby 
significantly inhibiting market access by U.S. firms. 
 
Insurance 
 
Brazil is potentially South America's largest insurance 
market, and earnings from premiums have grown rapidly in 
recent years. In 1996, Brazil eliminated the distinction 
between foreign and domestic capital, and many major U.S. 
firms have since entered the market, mainly via joint 
ventures with established companies. The Brazil 
Reinsurance Institute (IRB) is a state monopoly. While a 
1996 constitutional reform ostensibly abolished the 
monopoly, private reinsurers have been precluded from 
operating in Brazil pending the IRB's privatization, which 
has been delayed indefinitely by a court decision.   A 
2003 Constitutional amendment allows for the regulation of 
the reinsurance sector, including market entry.  If 
Brazilian shipping companies wish to obtain foreign hull 
insurance, they must submit information to IRB 
demonstrating that the foreign insurance policy is less 
expensive than that offered by Brazilian insurers. 
Brazilian importers must obtain cargo insurance from 
insurance firms resident in Brazil, although the firms may 
be foreign-owned. 
 
Banking and Other Financial Services 
 
Brazil has not ratified the WTO Financial Services 
Agreement, formally known as the Fifth Protocol to the 
GATS, which is necessary to bring Brazil's commitments 
under the Agreement into force. The Financial Services 
Agreement is still pending approval in the Brazilian 
Congress.  U.S. service exports to Brazil are impeded by 
restrictive investment laws, lack of transparency in 
administrative procedures, legal and administrative 
restrictions on remittances and sometimes arbitrary 
application of regulations. Service trade opportunities in 
some sectors have been affected by limitations on foreign 
capital participation. 
 
In negotiating the 1997 WTO Financial Services Agreement, 
Brazil made commitments in almost all service sub-sectors 
for non-insurance financial services, including banking 
and securities services.    Brazil's constitution 
precludes the expansion of foreign-owned banks until new 
financial sector legislation is issued.  For practical 
reasons, new legislation has not been issued, but the 
President of Brazil has the authority to authorize new 
foreign participants on a case-by-case basis. In practice, 
Brazil has approved most plans by foreign service 
suppliers to enter the market or expand existing 
operations.  As of December 2002, foreign-owned or 
controlled assets accounted for one third of Brazil's 
total financial sector equity, and over 18 U.S. financial 
service suppliers had established significant operations 
in Brazil. 
 
During 2002, a U.S. company involved in credit bureau 
activities raised national treatment concerns regarding 
the refusal by Receita Federal, Brazil's internal revenue 
service, to provide it with information that was being 
obtained by its local competitors. 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
 
In addition to restrictions discussed above, various 
prohibitions limit foreign investment in internal 
transportation, public utilities, media and other 
"strategic industries."  Foreign ownership of land 
adjacent to national borders remains prohibited under 
Brazilian law, unless approved by the National Security 
Council.  Despite investment restrictions, U.S. and other 
foreign firms have major investments in Brazil, with the 
U.S. accounting for more than one third of total foreign 
investment.  There is no Bilateral Investment Treaty 
between the United States and Brazil. 
 
HRINAK