This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121400Z Aug 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
 
 
Military: Mistake to Wait on Iraq Troop Deployment - 
Hurriyet 
If Summit Gives a Yes, Turkish Military Ready for Iraq - 
Sabah 
Turkey Waits for Washington's Response on Troop Deployment - 
Turkiye 
Americans Met with PKK, Asked Them to Lay Down Weapons - 
Milliyet 
Double Blow Against Uzan Family-Sabah 
82 Uzan Companies Under Police Investigation - Hurriyet 
Huge Investigation Against Uzan Family - Milliyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
 
Summit an Effort to Convince President Sezer - Radikal 
Decision Day at the Presidential Palace - Cumhuriyet 
Summit to Convince Sezer to Approve Troop Deployment in Iraq 
- Zaman 
BDDK (Banking Supervisory Board) Ignored Fraud in Imar Bank 
- Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq Summit at the Presidential Palace:  All papers report 
on the critical summit meeting to be held at the 
Presidential Palace this afternoon.  President Sezer, PM 
Erdogan, FM Gul, and TGS Chief Gen.Ozkok will attend the 
meeting.  "Zaman" notes that Defense Min. Gonul, 
Intelligence Undersecretary Atasagun, and Foreign Ministry 
Undersecretary Ziyal are also expected to join.  Government 
officials hope the military will be able to convince 
President Sezer on the necessity of a Turkish troop 
deployment in Iraq.  "Sabah" columnist Muharrem Sarikaya 
notes that unlike the situation before the Iraq war, the 
government and the military now agree on the necessity of a 
Turkish deployment in order to protect Turkey's national 
interests.  President Sezer has so far insisted on a UN or 
NATO decision for troop deployment.  "Cumhuriyet" notes that 
the President might choose to await the outcome of the UN 
Security Council meeting on August 21.  Turkey's National 
Security Council (NSC) will discuss the issue at its next 
meeting on August 22. 
 
 
US Officials Meet with the PKK:   "Milliyet" reports in a 
banner headline that US military officials met with leaders 
of the PKK/KADEK in Northern Iraq for the second time last 
week.  The first meeting reportedly took place in June.  US 
military officials from Erbil and Suleymaniye, protected by 
KDP peshmerge, went to the mountainous region in a five-car 
convoy protected from the air by two helicopters.  US 
officials reportedly tried to convince the PKK militants to 
lay down their weapons and encouraged them to get involved 
in political activities and media efforts in Iraq.   The PKK 
refused to lay down its weapons `for now' because of the 
turmoil and uncertainty in Iraq.  However, they did not 
reject the US proposal in its entirety, and requested that 
the talks be continued. 
 
 
Investigation Against Uzan Group Companies:   Today's papers 
give extensive coverage to reports that 82 Uzan group 
companies, including the family's media outlets,  were 
raided yesterday in various police actions around the 
country.  Many documents, including accounting records, were 
seized by the police.  "Milliyet" reports that the operation 
was carried out in line with the ongoing investigation of 
money laundering charges.  "Sabah" notes a second blow 
against the Uzans yesterday when President Sezer approved 
the banking law, which will hold bank owners and bank 
officials personally responsible for bank fraud and 
irregularities. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq 
 
 
"The Divine Mission of Bush" 
Ibrahim Karagul argued in the Islamist-intellectual Yeni 
Safak (8/12): "At this point there is no sense in arguing 
about the justifications used by the United States for the 
Iraq operation.  There is a game being staged right now, and 
we are just spectators or, at most, playing a supporting 
role.  The Washington administration looks like a racist 
junta, and there is a plan underway to redesign the world. 
.. The ultimate goal of the US is to establish a world 
empire.  We all sit and watch the seizure of world resources 
and the suppression of alternative voices.  Turkey's 
decision on whether or not to send troops to Iraq requires a 
larger vision to see the full picture.  This decision should 
not be evaluated only within the framework of Turkish- 
American relations and economic expectations.  This is not 
about our short-term interests.  This is about whether or 
not we bless the occupation and looting, whether or not we 
obey a power that intends to rule the world." 
 
 
"Not without an Arab presence" 
Erhan Basyurt wrote in the Islamist-intellectual Zaman 
(8/12): "Turkey has some questions on the issue of sending 
troops to Iraq, such as the legitimacy of the US presence 
and the US position as an occupation force. . The United 
States, on the other hand, has failed to win over the people 
of Iraq after the operation.  The democratization process 
seems to be alienating some important local figures.  The 
Iraqi Governing Council consists predominantly of names from 
the opposition who lived abroad.  The IGC is also alienating 
the Sunni Arabs, another major reason for the unhappiness 
among the Iraqi people. .Turkey should condition its 
military presence in Iraq on the agreement of at least one 
other Islamic country to send troops as well.  The military 
presence of an Arab country, preferably Egypt, is the best 
solution that will not only enhance Turkey's position, but 
also eliminate the possibility that Turkey will be labeled 
as a collaborator with the occupation force." 
 
 
DEUTSCH