This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 005223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL PBTS KPAL KWBG KIRF IS TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY EXPRESSES CONCERN ABOUT POSSIBLE FALL-OUT 
OVER JULY 22 HARAM AL-SHARIF/TEMPLE MOUNT INCIDENT 
 
 
REF: A. A) JERUSALEM 2176 
     ¶B. B) JERUSALEM 2265 
     ¶C. C) JERUSALEM 2267 
     ¶D. D) JERUSALEM 2439 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch for reasons 1.5 (b) and 
(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) MFA Middle East DG Burcuoglu advised DCM August 14 
that the July 22 Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif incident 
involving non-Muslim groups praying in the al-Aqsa mosque 
could adversely impact potential Turkish participation in 
Iraq and the Roadmap.  Burcuoglu believed that permitting 
non-Muslims to pray in the Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount area 
could initiate another intifada, similar to the September 
2000 incident after Sharon's visit to Islam's third holiest 
site. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) In parallel with ref D details for a viable solution 
to permit non-Muslim visitors to the Temple Mount/Haram 
al-Sharif, it is worth considering Turkey's concerns over 
this issue:  Burcuoglu urged the U.S. to tell the Israelis 
not to be provocative over internal political issues.  He 
reflected GOT concern that if the Israelis permit non-Muslims 
to visit the Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount, clashes could 
occur.  Burcuoglu feared these clashes could complicate 
Turkey's potential participation in regional programs such as 
Iraqi reconstruction and the Roadmap because the Turkish 
public and parliamentarians would likely react negatively. 
EDELMAN