This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004763 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPC (FALLS), G/TIP 
(LINDERMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KDEM KJUS DR
SUBJECT: GODR LAUNCHES CAMPAIGN AGAINST COMMERCIAL SEXUAL 
EXPLOITATION OF MINORS 
 
 
¶1.  On August 27 the GODR launched a hard-hitting campaign 
against commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  Billboards 
in beach areas will bear the message, "In the Dominican 
Republic, we protect our treasures.  Our beaches, mountains, 
monuments and our most precious treasure: our children." The 
displays have already appeared in local press. 
 
¶2.  Commercials warning abusers about jail time for offenders 
and traffickers will soon hit the airwaves.  Brochures 
promoting a child abuse prevention hotline and raising 
awareness of sexual exploitation already have been 
distributed with help from the National Association of Hotels 
and Restaurants (ASONAHORES).  The Ministry of Public Health 
has also released a publication explaining the 
inter-institutional commission's responsibilities to prevent 
abuse, protect victims and prosecute criminals.  This 
multifaceted campaign is another step in the GODR's efforts 
to address issues of trafficking in persons and  acknowledges 
the government's responsibility for proactive moves to 
protect children's human rights. 
 
¶3.  The GODR organism responsible for the campaigns is the 
Inter-institutional Commission Against the Abuse and 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents. 
Vice-President (and Minister of Education) Milagros Ortiz 
Bosch attended the kick-off.  This commission, led by NGO 
Idefa (Institute of the Dominican Family), includes 
representatives from the Ministries of Foreign Relations, 
Education, Labor, Women, and Tourism, the National Police, 
and the Attorney General's office among others.  Local 
partner ILO-IPEC (with financial backing from the US 
Department of Labor) and UNICEF are campaign sponsors along 
with the governments of Italy and Germany. 
HERTELL