This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
 
STATE FOR S/CT KATY GORE AND DS/IP/AF 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/13 
TAGS: PTER ASEC EAIR PGOV NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: NO SIGN OF MISSING 727 
 
 
REF: STATE 143140 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY POL/C BRIAN BROWNE.  REASONS: 1.5 (B, D & G). 
 
 
¶1. (S/NF) SUMMARY: In response to Reftel, Mission 
officers visited four Nigerian airports June 1 and did 
not see the missing 727 aircraft.  It is unlikely the 
aircraft could have landed in Nigeria without drawing 
considerable GON attention. Since the disappearance of 
the aircraft, DATT has remained in contact with the 
Nigerian Defense Intelligence Agency (NDIA) and senior 
Nigerian officials.  Nigeria-based IRS Airlines 
Chairman Rabiu Isyaku Rabiu, informed Ambassador Jeter 
that Aerospace Sales and Leasing of Jacksonville, FL, 
owned the missing aircraft, tail number N844AA and 
that the principal of Aerospace was Maury Joseph. 
Rabiu told the Ambassador that Joseph was probably in 
South Africa, and his telephone number was 27-73-315- 
¶0565. Rabiu, whose IRS Airlines' colors are similar to 
the silver/white fuselage and blue and white stripe of 
the aircraft, offered to show Post any documents 
regarding prior ownership of aircraft in the IRS 
fleet.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
MISSION VISITS FOUR AIRPORTS 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) The Mission sent officers to Abuja, Kaduna, 
Kano and Lagos airports Sunday June 1. (Domestic 
Airlines do not fly before 8 AM on Sundays).  Officers 
did not see an airplane fitting the description of the 
missing 727, but collected the following tail numbers 
of all 727 aircraft on the ground at that time: 
 
 
--Abuja Airport: One 727 at the domestic terminal, 
owned by Nigerian-based Chanchangi Airlines, tail 
number 5NB-CF.  No 727 aircraft at the international 
terminal. 
 
 
--Kaduna Airport: No 727 aircraft on tarmac. 
 
 
--Kano Airport: One 727 located on the shared 
international and domestic tarmac, owned by Nigerian- 
based Freedom Air, tail number 5N-BCY.  (NOTE:  A 
member of Nigeria's State Security Service (SSS) 
informed Emboff that the aircraft had not flown in 
over a year.  END NOTE). 
 
 
--Lagos International and Domestic Airports: One 727 
aircraft located at the domestic terminal, owned by 
IRS Airlines, tail number 5N-RIR .  No 727 aircraft at 
the international terminal. 
 
 
NIGERIA'S CLOSE COOPERATION 
--------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (S/NF) On May 27, the DATT contacted the Nigerian 
Defense Intelligence Agency (NDIA) about the missing 
aircraft and met with the Chief of Defense 
Intelligence.  The DATT contacted the Directors of 
Operations and Foreign Liaison, NDIA, and the Military 
Commander of Lagos International Airport when 
subsequent reports indicated the aircraft might be in 
Lagos or Kano.  All his contacts had no information 
that the airplane had landed in Nigeria or entered its 
airspace. 
 
 
IRS AIRLINES CHAIRMAN WILLING TO ASSIST 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (S/NF) The Ambassador spoke with Rabiu Isyaku 
Rabiu, Chairman of Nigerian-based IRS Airlines, May 
¶31.  Rabiu was aware of plane and mentioned key names. 
Rabiu said that Aerospace Sales and Leasing of 
Jacksonville, FL, owned the airplane.  Rabiu 
identified Maury Joseph as the principal owner of 
Aerospace.  Joseph was probably in South Africa and 
his telephone number was 27-73-315-0565, Rabiu told 
the Ambassador.  AN IRS 727, tail number 5N-AKR, was 
currently in Johannesburg for maintenance, Rabiu 
stated. Rabiu recalled that Aerospace had previously 
tried to sell IRS an aircraft with tail number N880AA 
but that IRS did not purchase the airplane because it 
was too old. To disprove his connection with the 
airplane, Rabiu offered to show us any documentation 
regarding the prior ownership of aircraft in the IRS 
fleet. 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶5. (S/NF) Post does not think that the missing 727 
aircraft could have entered Nigerian airspace and 
landed at one of four major airports, Port Harcourt 
International Airport or smaller domestic airports 
without attracting immediate GON attention.  At each 
of the visited airports, GON officials (SSS, Ministry 
of Aviation, FAAN and military officers) were aware of 
the missing airplane; the GON had earlier in the week 
alerted airport and security officials, to immediately 
impound the airplane and arrest its crew if it landed 
at any Nigerian Airport. END COMMENT 
 
 
JETER