This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002319 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RPM AND EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PHUM KDEM OIIP OTRA TU
SUBJECT: MESSAGE FROM AMBASSADOR ON FUNDING FOR 
U.S.-TURKISH JUDICIAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMS 
 
REF: DRL (OZKAN)-EMBASSY ANKARA 3/24 EMAIL 
 
 
¶1. Two years of patience, persistence and cooperation among 
Turkish and American agencies have yielded a successful 
conclusion to a remarkable series of legal exchanges.  By the 
end of 2002, nearly 600 Turkish jurists had participated in 
discussions and workshops, debating solutions to problems 
whose existence they had previously denied.  They have been 
exposed to American and international approaches that the 
insular training of Turkish judges heretofore has not 
included.  Many participants have begun to adopt new tactics 
and have called for further Turkish-American cooperation on 
these issues. 
 
 
¶2. Because this program so tangibly advances U.S. political 
interests, it is essential that we strengthen and expand it. 
To this end, three project proposals have been developed for 
a second phase: 1) Judicial Oversight of Police Conduct; 2) 
European Court of Human Rights Freedom of Expression 
Standards; and 3) Accelerated Trial Proceedings/Trial 
Alternatives.  DRL reports that OPDAT is best qualified to 
run the Judicial Oversight program and already has the needed 
funds.  DRL believes ISDLS is best qualified to run the other 
two programs and has asked for Embassy's views on whether to 
seek funding for both.  We strongly support funding for both 
the Freedom of Expression and Accelerated Trial programs. 
Both programs deal with fundamental U.S. human rights 
concerns in Turkey.  Restrictions on non-violent expression 
and lengthy judicial proceedings continue to undermine GOT 
efforts to improve overall human rights conditions in Turkey. 
 By funding both programs we will ensure that the judicial 
exchange program proceeds on a broad front and makes the 
greatest possible impact. 
PEARSON