This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 001666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR NP/CBM, EUR/SE, EUR/PRA, IO/PHO, NEA/NGA, INR/SPM 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: (X1, X6) 
TAGS: PARM PREL ETTC TU IZ SY JO UNSC CBW
SUBJECT: S13-03: TURKS WILL BLOCK HEAT EXCHANGER EXPORTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 64956 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1037 
     ¶C. ANKARA 891 
 
 
(U) Classified by Pol-Mil Counselor Stuart Brown.  Reasons 
1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (S) On March 13, polmiloff met with Ferhat Alkan of the 
MFA's Iraq Desk and delivered Ref A points.  Alkan remarked 
that the information was "news" to the MFA.  He promised to 
pass the information immediately to the Turkish National 
Intelligence Agency (TNIO), the Turkish General Staff, and 
via the Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade, to Turkish Customs. 
 
 
¶2.  (S) Polmiloff pressed Alkan regarding the mechanics of 
the GOT's preventing the exports and the method by which it 
would prevent third-country trans-shipments.  Alkan responded 
that, depending on the stage of the business transaction, 
either the Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade would refuse the 
export permit, or Turkish Customs would attempt to intercept 
an outbound shipment.  In response to polmiloff's reminder 
regarding Ref D, Alkan said that Foreign Trade had stopped 
exports of atropine autoinjectors in response to Post's 
February demarche and that the sole Iraqi-related shipment 
had been in August 2002.  In regard to Ref B, he told 
polmiloff that Foreign Trade is alert to the import and/or 
export of the meteorological balloons, but had not yet 
encountered them.  He noted that the TNIO has and would look 
into all firms that we have brought to the GOT's attention. 
PEARSON