This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
EB/TRA/AN FOR YOUNG; 
DOT FOR DESTA SHAW; 
FAA FOR ROBERT SWEET 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR IZ IT FAA AVIATION
SUBJECT: ALITALIA REPLY TO OCPA ISSUES AIR CARRIER 
SOLICITATION NOTICE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 193275 
 
 Â¶1.  On July 8, 2003, Alitalia CEO Francesco Mengozzi sent 
the Ambassador a copy of a letter to L. Paul Bremer (OCPA). 
The letter has been faxed to EB/TRA/AN.  Post has confirmed 
with Mr. Mengozzi's office that the same text was sent via 
email July 8 to biap@orha.centcom.mil. 
 
Begin text: 
 
To: Ambassador L. Paul Bremer 
Office of the Coalition Provisional Authority 
Baghdad - Iraq 
 
Subject:  Baghdad Commercial Air Service 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
We are pleased to write you with reference to the notice 
issued by your office, OCPA, on July 2nd, inviting airlines 
interested in providing scheduled passenger commercial air 
transport to and from Baghdad. 
 
Alitalia, Linee Aeree Italiane S.p.A., hereby submits its 
application to perform scheduled air services between Italy 
and Baghdad, reinstating an air link which in the past has 
proven to be very important for the development of economic 
and cultural ties between Iraq and the Republic of Italy. 
 
Alitalia-Linee Aeree Italiane S.p.A., is a company organized 
and existing under the laws of the Italian Republic, having 
its Head Office at Viale Alessandro Marchetti 111-00148 Rome 
and has a fleet of 170 aircraft, ranging from regional, 
short-medium haul to long haul equipment. 
 
Furthermore, Alitalia has developed over the years a 
widespread system of bilateral and multilateral partnerships, 
which enable us to offer seamless service to a broad range of 
destinations:  the core of this strategy is the membership in 
the SkyTeam Alliance, whose other members are Delta Airlines, 
Air France, Korean Air, Aeromexico, Czech Airlines. 
 
Alitalia is the Italian designated airline under the 
Italy-Iraq Air Services Agreement, as signed in 1963 and 
amended in 1976.  Pursuant to such ASA, Alitalia has been 
performing scheduled air services operating two wide body 
frequencies per week from Italy to Baghdad till the early 
'80s. 
 
Alitalia is a signatory of the IATA Intercarrier Agreement on 
Passenger Liability and of the IATA Agreement on Measures to 
Implement the IATA Intercarrier Agreement.  Alitalia also 
meets US FAA International Aviation Safety requirements and 
regulations, operating out of an FAA Category 1 country and 
holds the insurance coverage required by the Italian and 
International laws and regulations. 
 
In light of the foreseen reopening of Baghdad International 
Airport, Alitalia, wishing to effectively support the 
reconstruction and development of the civil aviation in Iraq, 
is requesting to reinstate its operations, in the course of 
the upcoming IATA Winter Season 2003/2004; as we expect a 
meaningful growth of air services demand due to the global 
effort, we plan to reach, within approximately two IATA 
seasons from start up, a daily service pattern, possibly in 
code-sharing cooperation with our Sky Team Alliance partners. 
 
Depending on the operational and logistical capabilities of 
Baghdad International Airport, the starting operational 
pattern shall be performing on a three weekly services basis, 
on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays, deploying either B767 or 
A320 equipment. 
 
The routing being considered, based on the information 
currently available and taking into account the goodwill and 
flexibility of neighbouring nations, provides for a direct or 
via intermediate point service from Rome/Milan to Baghdad; 
the operational as well as infrastructural capabilities of 
Baghdad International Airport will also play a key role when 
firming timings and scheduling details.  In any case, flight 
schedules will aim to adequately satisfy the demand of 
traffic flows originating and terminating in Iraq or in 
Italy, as well as traffic flows connecting through Italy to 
destinations worldwide. 
 
We take the liberty to underline that Italy appears, for the 
 
 
above mentioned historical and economic reasons, on top of a 
fortunate geographic location, as the most suitable gateway 
between Iraq and the western world. 
 
Fare structures currently being considered, take into account 
the social and economical environment and reflect standard 
Alitalia practice within the region. 
 
Alitalia, in light of the need to provide an efficient, safe 
and reliable air tranportation service, will need to verify 
in place, with a specific team, all issues regarding 
logistical, crews and aircraft assistance requirements, in 
close cooperation with your office and local authorities. 
 
Thanking you in advance for the attention and support you 
will give to Alitalia's application, Alitalia would like to 
reiterate its willingness in assisting and actively 
participating in the ongoing effort to reconstruct and 
develop the economy of Iraq. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
(signed) 
Francesco Mengozzi 
Managing Director and CEO 
Alitalia 
Sembler 
NNNN 
	2003ROME03109 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED