This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/12/2013 
TAGS: KNNP PARM MNUC IR CA IAEA
SUBJECT: IAEA/IRAN: CANADA SAYS IT WILL SUPPORT OUR EFFORTS 
TO GET BOG RESOLUTION 
 
REF: (A) STATE 158048 (B) UNVIE 621 (C) OTTAWA 1556 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Stephen R. Kelly, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Canadian Deputy Foreign Minister Lavertu told DCM on 
June 12 that Canada will support our efforts to get a formal 
resolution on Iran at the June 16 IAEA Board of Governors 
(BOG) meeting (ref. A).  Despite the Canadian delegation's 
skepticism in Vienna that such a resolution will be 
attainable (ref. B), Lavertu said Canada will be with us. 
Should a resolution prove impossible, he continued, Canada 
will work with us on an alternative, unambiguous message from 
the BOG meeting.  Lavertu said that in addition to the tough 
messages he and Foreign Minister Graham delivered to their 
Iranian counterparts in Tehran and Paris, respectively (ref. 
C), he met with the Iranian Ambassador in Ottawa after the 
June 6 release of the IAEA report.  Lavertu reiterated 
Canada's strong concerns, and told the Ambassador that it was 
most unusual for a preliminary IAEA report to be so strongly 
worded. 
 
¶2. (C) Terry Wood, Foreign Affairs Deputy Director for 
Nonproliferation, told us the Canadian Embassy in Tehran 
attended AEOI President Aghazadeh's June 9 briefing in Tehran 
(ref. B), and that there were a number of factual errors in 
Aghazadeh's presentation.  Wood said Aghazadeh downplayed 
Iran's non-declarations as insignificant oversights, and 
described an additional protocol as "no big deal" because 
only two countries with significant nuclear programs have 
signed one thus far.  Agazadeh warned that if the pressure 
continues, Iran will limit its cooperation with the IAEA. 
 
¶3. (C) Wood said that Canada is preparing a robust 
intervention for the BOG meeting.  He underscored Canada's 
particular concern about the "Kalaye Electric" site, saying 
that Canada had an intelligence source in the late 1990s who 
made them aware of nuclear activity there. 
CELLUCCI