This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 003157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR PRM, E, EB, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, AND IO 
NSC FOR QUANRUD AND BRYZA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ETTC PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: USG CONTRACTOR BEGINS TO EXPORT TURKISH LPG AND 
GASOLINE TO IRAQ 
 
REF: A) ANKARA 2915 B) KUWAIT 1825 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  U.S. military contractor Kellogg, Brown, 
and Root (KBR) has successfully delivered its first shipment 
of Turkish Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) and gasoline from 
Turkey to Iraq, which will be donated as humanitarian 
assistance to Iraqi civilians.  The U.S. military has 
contracted KBR to purchase and transport approximately 700 
metric tons of LPG and one million gallons of benzine to Iraq 
daily, seven days per week, for at least four weeks.  The GOT 
has thus far facilitated the purchase and transport of this 
fuel, which should bring at least USD 40 million to the 
Turkish economy.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) After receiving a task order from Task Force Restore 
Iraqi Oil (TF Rio) o/a May 7, U.S. military contractor 
Kellogg, Brown and Root (KBR) began arrangements to export 
Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) and benzine (gasoline) from Turkey 
to Northern Iraq (ref A).  The task order authorizes KBR to 
purchase LPG and gasoline commercially in Turkey and 
transport it into Iraq to be donated as humanitarian 
assistance to Iraqi civilians through TF Rio.  KBR expects to 
purchase and transport approximately 700 metric tons of LPG 
and one million gallons of benzine to Iraq daily, seven days 
per week, for at least four weeks.  (Note:  We understand 
that TF Rio is likely to increase these quantities and the 
duration of the operation.  End note.)  Embassy requested and 
received from the Turkish MFA assurances that the GOT would 
take steps to expedite the purchase and transport of this 
humanitarian assistance to Iraq. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The contractor estimates that exporting this amount 
of LPG and benzine will require approximately 240 trucks per 
day -- 40 trucks for the LPG, and 200 trucks for the benzine. 
 Although KBR expects it will take at least a week to arrange 
daily export of these quantities, it launched a successful 
trial run over the past three days.  From May 10 to May 12, 
93 trucks passed through Harbur Gate into Iraq:  54 trucks 
carrying approximately 300,000 gallons of benzine, and 39 
trucks carrying approximately 800 metric tons of LPG.  We 
understand there have been delays in loading the trucks in 
Turkey as well as off-loading in Iraq, but it appears these 
delays are part of the normal learning curve associated with 
staging an operation of this size. 
 
 
¶4. (U) The embassy issued a press release May 10 announcing 
that the first convoy carrying humanitarian assistance LPG 
and gasoline had crossed into Iraq from Turkey.  The press 
release notes that Turkey is cooperating with the U.S. in 
providing this HA to the people of Iraq by facilitating the 
passage of the vehicles.  It also notes that the U.S. is 
purchasing and transporting this fuel using Turkish firms, 
and estimates the U.S. government will spend nearly USD 40 
million in Turkey in the first month of this operation. 
PEARSON