This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WGSARS, OES/PCI, WHA/CAN (RUNNING) 
 
HHS FOR OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY, OFFICE OF 
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (STEIGER) 
 
CDC for Global Health Office (Cox) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO AMED CA SARS
SUBJECT: WGSARS: Canada-wide Status Report April 21 
(Number 5) 
 
Ref. (A) Ottawa 1107 (SARS Canada-wide Report #4) 
 
     (B) Toronto 1144(Ontario SARS Update #14) 
 
¶1.  Health Canada as of April 17 has begun to provide 
Health Alert notices to passengers departing by train 
from Toronto's Union Station.  The Health Alert notice 
describes the symptoms of SARS and advises travelers to 
see a physician if they develop symptoms. 
 
¶2.  As of 13:00 Eastern Daylight Savings Time April 21, 
2003, Health Canada has received reports of 316 
probable or suspect cases of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) in Canada.  There have been 14 deaths 
attributed to SARS (13 probable cases and 1 suspect 
case) all linked to the Toronto nexus.  To date, 
transmission has been limited to specific transmission 
settings such as households, hospitals and specific 
community settings.  The details of the cases to date 
are as follows: 
 
-- Ontario is reporting 135 probable and 124 suspect 
cases. (See Toronto reporting for details.) 
 
-- British Columbia is reporting 4 probable and 41 
suspect cases.  (Increase of 4 suspect cases since 
report #4) 
 
-- New Brunswick is reporting 2 suspect cases.  (No 
change.) 
 
-- Saskatchewan is reporting 1 suspect case. (No 
change.) 
 
-- Alberta is reporting 5 suspect cases. (No change.) 
 
-- Prince Edward Island is reporting 4 suspect cases. 
(No change.) 
 
Cellucci