This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003826 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
USDOC FOR 4520/ITA/MAC/ONE/PTHANOS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND EINV ETRD JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN'S PRIVATIZATION PROGRAM MOVES FORWARD 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The Jordanian Executive Privatization Commission 
(EPC) announced June 24 four bidders as finalists for the 
purchase of a 26% stake in the Arab Potash Company (APC), the 
world's fifth largest potash producer.  The Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, the German firm Kali und Salz, 
China's Sinochem, and Mitsubishi of Japan, were selected by 
APC, the GOJ, and the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking (HSBC), 
the financial consultant for the sale, to submit final bids 
by July 7.  The GOJ currently owns 52.6% of the company, long 
considered Jordan's "crown jewel" in the roster of pending 
privatizations.  The remainder is owned by a consortium of 
Arab governments, including the governments of Iraq, Saudi 
Arabia, Libya, and Kuwait. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Salem Ghawi, Consultant for the EPC, told us the 
government would do everything to ensure that the sale was 
carried out in "a most transparent manner."  Ghawi said a 
very limited steering committee, made up of EPC Chairman Adel 
al-Kodeh and an HSBC executive would open the bids and choose 
the winning bid based on the proposed price of shares.  He 
said the firm chosen would have thirty days to negotiate the 
final terms of the deal with the committee; should the 
negotiations fail, the second highest bidder would be invited 
to step in.  Ghawi added that the APC will send a letter to 
the Amman Stock Exchange asking it to suspend trading on APC 
shares from July 6 to the day a winner is announced.  In 
order to avoid any suggestion of conflict of interest, only 
the committee will have access to the final offers.  The 
putative sale would conclude an eighteen month-long effort on 
the part of the EPC to find a strategic partner for APC, and 
would mark a significant milestone in the GOJ's privatization 
program. 
 
 
GNEHM