This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO MOPS PGOV SNAR HO IZ
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
DONALD H. RUMSFELD TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
 
¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El Heraldo" on 
8/22 entitled "Anti-drug base".  "If the U.S. were to set up a 
base with the exclusive purpose of fighting against the terrible 
threat of narcotrafficking, it would help stop the operations of 
drug mafias that use Honduran territory as a bridge to transport 
the coke demanded by the growing American population of drug 
addicts.  Besides, it will hinder the corruption generated by 
this illegal activity and the risk of Honduras becoming a narco- 
state.  Definitely, it could prevent a lot of suffering in the 
future for us." 
 
"Thus, it's not odd that the visits of high ranking officials of 
the U.S. government, such as the CJCS General Richard Myers and 
the Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld may have had the goal of 
negotiating the installation of a center to fight against 
narcotrafficking.  These visits could also be aimed at achieving 
the support of the Honduran society for this undertaking." 
 
"Until we see if the there will be such a base or not, we hope 
the U.S. government increases its support to its Honduran 
counterpart in the fight against narcotrafficking, because the 
huge economic resources this illegal activity generates greatly 
surpass our limited capabilities to confront it.  Obviously, the 
U.S. can do a lot more than just give money, helicopters and 
state-of-the-art technology to fight drugs; it has the power to 
eradicate these mafias for good: it only has to stop its millions 
of drug addicts from buying heroin and cocaine, and end the 
laundering of billions of narco-dollars that its financial system 
does." 
 
¶2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily "La Prensa" on 
8/22 entitled "Gratitude?".  "The visit of the U.S. Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld just a few days after CJCS General 
Richard Myers came to Honduras doesn't add up with the official 
explanation given as the goal of both visits.  Previous 
experience leads us to think that they entailed much more than 
expressing the gratitude of the U.S. government, no matter how 
real and sincere it appears to be." 
 
"What were the issues discussed with President Maduro?  The press 
conference given by the President and his distinguished visitor 
concentrated on issues we already knew about and which have been 
discussed repeatedly between our two governments." 
 
"We don't disregard the fight against drug trafficking, as we 
don't think we're immune to terrorism.  We need to carry on with 
the joint efforts with the international community to confront 
these threats that have increased poverty and misery in 
Honduras." 
 
¶3. Today's edition of San Pedro Sula-based daily "La Prensa", ran 
on its front page headline "Maduro requests concrete support from 
the U.S.": I would like to see from our North American friends a 
change in its policy, and a consequent and effective fight 
against narcotrafficking".  Also in the same article he clarified 
some headlines of yesterday's newspapers, which stated that 
during the visits of CJCS General Richard Myers and Secretary of 
Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, the U.S. and Honduras had 
negotiations to establish an anti-drug base in Honduras. 
 
Regarding this issue, Maduro stated "It's not true, they (General 
Myers and Secretary Rumsfeld and their delegations) came for a 
very simple reason, to thank the Honduran people for our support 
by sending troops for the pacification and reconstruction in 
Iraq.  There was nothing more." 
 
¶4. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El Heraldo" on 
8/22 entitled "It would be an excellent idea."  "Armida de Lopez 
Contreras, Vice-president of Honduras and President of the 
National Council Against Narcotrafficking said that it would be 
an excellent idea to establish an anti-drug base in Honduras." 
 
"Several Honduran political leaders have said that we need more 
determined assistance from the U.S. in the fight against 
narcotrafficking.  Lopez Contreras stated, 'I believe that is the 
opinion of all politicians'. " 
 
Palmer