This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008270 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV GM EUN
SUBJECT: CDU/Teufel: Insider View of European Constitution 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Baden-Wuerttemberg Minister-President (M-P) Erwin 
Teufel (CDU - Christian Democratic Union), a prominent 
German conservative and active participant in drafting the 
proposed European constitution, supports the draft 
constitution despite its shortcomings from a conservative 
perspective.  A Convention insider, Teufel appears 
committed to enacting the constitution, but other German 
opposition figures may see political opportunity in 
highlighting its perceived flaws.  Conservative unhappiness 
on issues such as immigration and traditional values could 
limit German popular acceptance of the proposed 
constitution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Pol/Econ reps met with Dr. Alexandra Zoller 
(responsible for European Affairs in Baden-Wuerttemberg) 
who accompanied Teufel to "European Convention" meetings 
over the past year.  As one of 108 delegates to the 
Convention, Teufel represented the Bundesrat and the 16 
German states (FM Joschka Fischer represented the national 
government and former MdB Juergen Meyer (SPD) represented 
the Bundestag) in the process of drafting a European 
constitution to redefine the EU's institutions and 
authority. 
 
EUROPEAN CONSTITUTION FROM A CONSERVATIVE GERMAN VIEWPOINT 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) At the Convention, Teufel sought to limit control 
from Brussels on issues conservatives feel are better 
handled at the local or national level.  Both Teufel and 
the Schroeder government wanted to specify which powers 
would be assigned to the EU, national, and sub-national 
authorities.  Teufel acknowledges that security and foreign 
relations need to be coordinated at the EU level, and that 
the EU must continue to govern trade, monetary policy, and 
commerce.  At the same time, Teufel sought to guarantee 
local authority over many bread-and-butter issues including 
utilities, infrastructure, land use, and elements of social 
policy.  In Dr. Zoller's view, the Schroeder government 
gave only half-hearted support for local empowerment, and 
Teufel was ultimately unsuccessful. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Zoller expressed concern over issues such as 
immigration, asylum, and labor market participation.  Under 
the current draft, some of these issues will now only 
require a qualified majority vote.  Most Germans worry 
about the burden of immigrants and asylum seekers, and 
conservatives may try to capitalize on any future EU 
liberalization under the new voting procedures. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Like many others in the CDU, Teufel remains 
opposed to Turkish EU membership and says that the EU could 
become unwieldy and overly costly if it grows too large, 
too quickly.  Zoller raised concerns that an Islamic 
country (Turkey) would be the most populous country within 
the EU by 2020, implying that Turkey is too big, too poor, 
and too different culturally for the EU to digest 
successfully, even in the long run.  Teufel supported 
inserting a preamble reference to the EU's Christian 
foundations (similar to the Polish constitution), an 
initiative opposed by the French and others who considered 
it offensive to other faiths.  NOTE:  The final preamble 
text makes general reference to the "cultural, religious, 
and humanist inheritance of Europe" but does not refer to 
any specific religion.  END NOTE. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Personally committed, Teufel sees the draft 
Constitution as a flawed but acceptable compromise -- a 
position generally in line with Schroeder and Fischer's 
view that the current draft represents the best compromise 
achievable and should thus be adopted without changes at 
the upcoming intergovernmental conference.  Other German 
opposition members may be less supportive and more 
opportunistic; we note Bavaria's suggestion that it may 
vote in the Bundesrat against the current draft 
Constitution.  Teufel's importance may be in convincing the 
CDU and the broader German public of the merits of the 
draft, thus helping Germany to close ranks behind a new 
European constitution.  END COMMENT. 
 
BACKGROUND: BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG AND ERWIN TEUFEL 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7. (U) Baden-Wuerttemberg is the third largest state in 
Germany in terms of population and territory, with a GDP 
larger than Austria, Sweden, or Belgium.  Major U.S. 
companies, including IBM, Kodak, and Hewlett-Packard, have 
their German headquarters in Baden-Wuerttemberg.  Minister- 
president since 1991, Teufel has solid control over this 
largely conservative region. 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Teufel apparently enjoyed broad support from 
German political parties for his role at the Convention. 
Teufel befriended Giscard d'Estaing and got along well with 
FM Joschka Fischer.  On the heels of the year-long 
convention, Teufel has broadened his network of contacts 
across Europe, but now stands under pressure to support the 
draft constitution despite his reservations as a political 
conservative. 
BODDE