This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MARCH 6, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Military Decree-Hurriyet 
TGS Chief Ozkok Supports the Decree-Sabah 
Gen.Ozkok: We share view of the Government regarding the 
decree-Turkiye 
Approval from the military for a Northern Front-Aksam 
Gen.Ozkok: The worst alternative is to remain out of 
developments-Milliyet 
Denktas will go to The Hague to say No-Milliyet 
Denktas: Annan Plan Can Not be completed by March 30- 
Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
5 Historic Messages from TGS Chief Ozkok-Zaman 
Triple Veto to the US-Yeni Safak 
Does the US Know Something We don't?-Radikal 
Support for the Government from the Military-Cumhuriyet 
Denktas: Annan Plan is a Fait Accompli 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Morale boost to the Markets by General Ozkok-Finansal Forum 
PM Gul: Iraq Should increase Cooperation with the UN-Dunya 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: Turkish Chief of General Staff Hilmi Ozkok expressed 
full support for the operational plans that were rejected by 
the parliament last weekend.  General Ozkok clarified 
charges that `the Turkish military is not supporting the 
northern front option at this stage' by saying `the Turkish 
military's view is the same as that expressed in the 
authorization decree.'  The General's statement became the 
headline story in every Turkish paper. He approached the 
Iraq issue as follows: "The Turkish military is also against 
the war, but we should act realistically and take the side 
of the US in the name of national interests and to 
compensate Turkey's losses."  General Ozkok also emphasized 
that staying out of the inevitable war will only ensure that 
Turkey will not receive any compensation for its losses and 
will prevent Turkey from having a say in the post-war 
period. 
 
 
General Ozkok's remarks were well-received by the AKP 
government.  AKP party officials commented that the 
clarification of the military's position on the issue will 
be very helpful in passing the authorization decree from the 
parliament.  The timing of the second decision from 
parliament receives a lot of speculation in the Turkish 
press.  Papers mostly have reached a consensus that the 
issue will be taken up by the new government right after the 
March 9 special election, under Tayyip Erdogan's 
premiership.  There is no set date for this action, however, 
and Erdogan said that the party will wait to see a second 
UNSC resolution as part of the evaluation process. 
 
 
Stories also highlight that markets are calm now as the 
Turkish parliamentary approval is expected following the 
announcement of support by the military.  "Radikal" features 
the continuing base modernization efforts on Turkish bases 
and ports, and asks the readers: "The US is continuing its 
efforts and military work in spite of the Turkish rejection 
of troop deployments.  Is there something the US knows that 
we don't?"   A story in "Radikal" talks about MFA work on 
minor revisions to the current authorization decree, which 
might reduce the duration for U.S. troops from 6 to 3 
months, and decrease the number of American soldiers in 
Turkey.  In the meantime, "Hurriyet" carries an analysis 
highlighting the dialogue between Turkey and the US.  There 
is even an alternate plan in the absence of Turkish approval 
for US ground troops, "Hurriyet" writes.  The story claims 
that Ambassador Pearson mentioned to Prime Minister Gul the 
possible use of air bases only.  Depending of the outcome of 
the Turkish-American dialogue, Ankara might host a 
delegation from the State Department next week. 
 
 
"Yeni Safak" writes that due to the Turkish parliament's 
denial of permission for US ground troops, the Bush 
administration is sending a Congressional delegation headed 
by Representative Wexler to Turkey for a series of high- 
level appointments.  The story reminds readers that Wexler 
was among the group of 38 congressmen who wrote a letter to 
PM Gul asking Turkey to approve the deployment of ground 
troops on Turkish soil. 
 
 
 
 
Cyprus: "Milliyet" reports that Denktas arrived in Ankara 
for meetings with Turkish officials prior to his trip to the 
Hague.  Denktas will hold a summit meeting today at the 
Presidential Palace with Turkish officials to discuss the 
revised Annan plan and the `March 30 Referandum offer.' 
Responding to questions of journalists yesterday, Annan was 
quoted as saying that `The new plan is a fait accompli. 
Annan told us to go to the Hague whether we have a positive 
or negative response.  Therefore, I am going to the Hague to 
say `no' and to explain the reasons for it.'  Meanwhile, 
"Milliyet" reports that during his meetings in Ankara, 
Denktas will exert efforts to secure support for the 
economic aid package.  Denktas says that the goal of the 
package is to give support to Turkish Cypriot youth.  It is 
reported that Denktas will meet with parliamentary speaker 
Arinc and with PM Gul.  He will also address the parliament. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq 
 
 
"Washington's calendar" 
Cengiz Candar of conservative "Dunden Bugune Tercuman" 
details the timing of the US operation plans (3/6): "The 
latest information coming from General Myers shows that the 
upcoming Iraq operation, from the standpoint of military 
tactics, will be very different from the Gulf war.  . Leaked 
information indicates that 3,000 guided missiles will begin 
the strike, followed in 48 hours by a massive air 
bombardment and an immediate ground operation.  General 
Myers confirmed the use of a northern front, which will 
happen with or without Turkey. . Currently the number of US 
troops stationed in the Gulf is 200,000.  This force will be 
enhanced with an additional 60,000 now on their way to the 
region.  Myers is now ready to take the action, and is 
waiting for the order from President Bush.  The order could 
come at any time. General Tommy Franks has already presented 
the final plan to President Bush.  Washington sources tell 
me that next week the US will declare a 2 or 3-day deadline 
to Saddam Hussein.  During that period, the UN inspectors 
and the press corps will be able to leave the country so 
that the operation can begin sometime between March 12 and 
Â¶13.  Based on this calendar, we can conclude that the US 
might not even wait for the second decree to be presented 
for Turkish parliamentary approval." 
 
 
"Clarification of the goals" 
Sami Kohen analyzed in mass appeal Milliyet (3/6): 
"According to recent statements coming from Iraqi opposition 
figures, their main goal is to preserve Iraq's territorial 
integrity and form a democratic and federal structure. 
Seeking to address Turkish concerns, they are also denying 
any intention of establishing an independent Kurdish state. 
It is now Ankara's turn to clarify what are the acceptable 
and unacceptable limits in Iraq for Turkey during the post- 
Saddam era.  This should be a very clear message.  We all 
know well Turkey's objection to an independent state. 
However, the Turkish policy on a federal structure in Iraq 
requires clarification. . Ankara should formulate a policy 
based on realistic assessments.  During this assessment 
procedure, it is absolutely necessary to maintain channels 
of dialogue with Kurdish and other Iraqi groups so that 
there will be no more misunderstandings." 
 
 
PEARSON