This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 001499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
FOR GENERAL HILL AND WHA/FISK FROM AMBASSADOR PALMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/25/2013 
TAGS: AMGT HO
SUBJECT: OFFICIAL INFORMAL - RESUMPTION OF AIR-TRACKING 
INFORMATION SHARING WITH THE GOH 
 
REF: A. STATE 144757 
 
     ¶B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 052246Z JUN 03 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S) General Hill: 
 
Thank you for your May 29 note in which you requested the 
April 15 accident investigation report and a review of the 
substantive actions taken be the Honduran military to prevent 
a similar occurrence from happening in the future. I will 
provide you a copy of the official accident report issued by 
the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) to Honduran Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve, coupled with an informal translation 
completed by the Embassy.  (Note, the date of the report is 
March 14, rather than April 15, due to an error by the GOH.) 
 
Regarding substantive actions taken by the HOAF to prevent a 
similar incident from reoccurring, the HOAF recently 
announced a shift from aerial interdiction to a ground 
interdiction strategy (ref B).  While the HOAF could have 
withdrawn entirely from any counter-drug participation during 
the suspension of intelligence sharing, this strategy shift 
demonstrates that they are still engaged, and is a direct 
result of MOD Breve's new strategic focus to combat drug 
trafficking while avoiding the pitfalls of shooting down a 
plane.  I believe that a new and unequivocal understanding 
exists between the HOAF and the senior Honduran civilian 
leadership which will not permit a future shoot-down incident 
to occur.  The Government of Hondurans and its Armed Forces 
are ready to move forward in accordance with SOUTHCOM policy 
on intelligence sharing. 
 
I appreciate the opportunity to work with you on this 
important issue and look forward to the resumption of 
air-track information sharing with the GOH at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Larry Palmer 
 
Palmer