This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press 
summary for August 20, 2003.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Bolge / In Adana a big crowd of people, 
including some parliament members and the mayor 
of Adana, gathered to mourn on the first 
anniversary of the 39 people who died in a bus 
accident on their return from the Haci Bektas 
Veli ceremonies. 
 
 
 
 
¶3. Bolge / Democrat Turkish Party (DTP) started 
its election campaign in Adiyaman.  Sema 
Kucuksoz, Head of DTP, addressed the 
assembled group. 
 
 
¶4. Turkiye / In Solhan, Bingol Province, 
Security officials found seven Afghans who had 
entered Turkey illegally. 
 
 
¶5. Turkiye / In Araban, Gaziantep Province, 
Gendarme Forces found some jewellery and coins 
of historical value and arrested three people 
for keeping them illegally. 
 
 
 
 
ECONOMIC 
 
 
¶6. Turkiye / In Dicle, Diyarbakir Province 55 
people have contracted skin viruses, which take 
the form of unusually large abscesses, and 
which are medically described as "leishmania". 
People get contaminated after being bitten by a 
special type of mosquito called "Tatarcik". 
 
 
¶7. Milli Gazete / Kilis, is in quarantine for 
rabies.  Kilis Health Authorities announced 
that all animals entering and leaving Kilis 
would be in quarantine for six months. 
 
 
¶8. Sabah Guney / Immunization vaccine stock, 
such as Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR) in the 
Southeast region health clinics have been 
exhausted.  About 135 health clinics in Adana 
cannot implement their normal pediatric 
immunization programs. Serdar Mercan, Head of 
the health authorities in Adana, stated that 
they are considering bids given by 
pharmaceutical manufacturing companies and will 
make a decision soon. 
 
 
¶9. Turkiye / Sanliurfa Hydroelectric Power 
Station is going to be ready for service by 
year 2004. 
 
 
10.Sabah Guney, Evrensel / The State Employees' 
Union Confederation (KESK) in Adana and Mersin 
protested the government's financial policy, 
including non-payment of salary increases. 
 
 
11.Bolge / Seyfettin Yilmaz, Head of the Adana 
Forest Ministry announced all personnel are on 
alert in case of a forest fire.  Yilmaz stated 
that they have enough vehicles and personnel to 
fight forest fires. 
¶12. Bolge, Zaman, Turkiye, Milliyet / Aytac 
Durak, Mayor of Adana, announced that the 
municipality has spent about 2 million USD for 
the preparations of The International 
Industrial Fair which will be held in Adana 
between the dates of October 6 and 12. 
HART