This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 001625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC FR TU
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: UNESCO: ANNOUNCEMENT OF U.S. 
RE-ENTRY AND CANDIDACY FOR EXECUTIVE BOARD 
 
REF: A) SECSTATE 54900 B) ANKARA 7265 
 
 
¶1.  Poloffs delivered ref (A) demarche March 13 to MFA Head 
of Department for Multilateral Cultural Affairs, Gulseren 
Celik.  Celik expressed appreciation for USG's impending 
re-entry to UNESCO.  She stated GOT will give due 
consideration to Turkish support of USG candidacy to UNESCO 
Executive Board.  GOT will notify us at a later date 
regarding its preferences for the October 10, 2003, election 
of the executive board. 
 
 
¶2.  Celik also highlighted upcoming Turkish candidacies and 
requested USG support.  Per ref (B), GOT is competing for 
membership to the Intergovernmental Committee for the 
Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage at the 
elections to be held during the October 2003 fourteenth 
session of the General Assembly on Protection of World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage.  Turkey will also run for the 
executive boards of the following committees for UNESCO: 
International Bioethics Committee (IBC), International 
Hydrological Program (IHP), and Intergovernmental Committee 
for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its 
Countries of Origin or its Restitution in case of Illicit 
Appropriation.  GOT plans to provide information concerning 
GOT UNESCO candidacies in upcoming months. 
PEARSON