O 020222Z DEC 03
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1172
INFO ASEAN COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L  PHNOM PENH 001990 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER CB
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH CAMBODIAN FOREIGN 
MINISTER HOR NAMHONG 
 
REF: A. STATE 329077 
     ¶B. PHNOM PENH 1969 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Charles A. Ray.  Reason: 1.4 (b) (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  The Ambassador briefed Foreign Minister 
Hor Namhong December 1 on his recent meetings in Washington 
and California.  The Ambassador addressed concerns the 
Foreign Minister had expressed about the activities of the 
Cambodian Freedom Fighters, explaining that the case remained 
open.  He told the FM that Washington officials appreciated 
Cambodia's actions and cooperation in a number of areas, most 
notably counter-terrorism, but also anti-trafficking and the 
linkage of labor rights and trade.  He stressed the need for 
judicial reform and his commitment to moving the process 
forward.  On the current political situation, the Ambassador 
urged the government to continue to engage in peaceful, 
Constitutional dialogue to break the deadlock over formation 
of a new government.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) On December 1, the Ambassador met with Foreign 
Minister Hor Namhong to brief him on his recent meetings in 
the U.S. and to provide a response to the Minister's 
questions regarding the FBI's investigation into the 
activities of the Cambodian Freedom Fighters (CFF) (reftels). 
  On the CFF, the Ambassador emphasized that the 
investigation was not by any means closed and that Washington 
had convened an interagency meeting in October to discuss the 
CFF and similar cases.  He said that we would continue to 
ensure that the CFF case was not overlooked, but the Minister 
should understand that in the post 9/11 environment the 
Department of Justice and FBI had higher priorities.  Hor 
Namhong thanked the Ambassador for the prompt response, 
observing that Cambodia was an open society, that nothing 
prevented citizens from organizing a legitimate political 
party to further their political goals, and that there was no 
reason to resort to armed force. 
 
¶3.  (C) The Ambassador told Namhong that there were a number 
of areas in which Washington officials appreciated Cambodia's 
actions, most notably the RGC's cooperation in the war on 
terrorism.  He added that many in the U.S. Congress have 
concerns about working with the Cambodian government, but 
they recognized the areas of mutual interest and the need to 
cooperate.  We were looking for ways to enhance this 
cooperation. 
 
¶4.  (C) Noting that the problem of human trafficking was one 
of the President's highest priorities, the Ambassador told 
the Foreign Minister that several senior Department officials 
praised Cambodia's anti-trafficking efforts.  They similarly 
praised the RGC's cooperation in returning accused pedophiles 
to the U.S. for prosecution. 
 
¶5.  (C) The Ambassador commented that judicial reform in 
Cambodia has lagged and we believed there was a critical need 
to move judicial reform forward and to create mechanisms for 
conflict resolution so as to instill implicit trust among 
Cambodian citizens.  Influential American legislators agreed 
with this assessment, he said.  The Ambassador told the FM 
that a group of judges and legal scholars would be visiting 
from California in January and he hoped to get them involved 
in assessing the state of the legal system and judicial 
reform process.  Hor Namhong commented that Cambodia also 
needs teachers for the new School of Judges and Prosecutors. 
 
¶6.  (C) Washington officials also praised Cambodia's creation 
of linkage between labor rights and trade, the Ambassador 
added.  He pointed out that while much needed to be done, 
Cambodia could serve as a model for others in this area. 
 
¶7.  (C) On the current political situation, the Ambassador 
related to Hor Namhong that there was concern among some in 
Washington about the delay in forming a new government and 
potential for violence.  He urged the government to continue 
to engage in peaceful, Constitutional dialogue to resolve the 
deadlock. 
 
¶8.  (C) In response to the FM's question about the feelings 
and attitudes of the Cambodian-American communities with 
which he met in San Francisco and Long Beach, the Ambassador 
said that he found the communities to be divided on political 
issues with allegiance to the parties very strong.  However, 
the younger generation appeared to be less polarized, he 
said.  Nevertheless, the issues that most interested the 
Cambodian-Americans he met were the deportation of Cambodian 
nationals and why immigrant visas were not issued in Phnom 
Penh. 
 
¶9.  (C) Hor Namhong expressed concern that the vote in Taiwan 
approving the holding of a referendum on independence held 
the potential for endangering regional peace and stability. 
Lastly, he mentioned to the Ambassador that the Indonesian 
government had contacted the Cambodians regarding the details 
of our Article 98 Agreement. 
 
RAY