This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 001264 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2013 
TAGS: PREL AL SA EG IZ JO
SUBJECT: FONMIN MUASHER: ARAB LEAGUE SUMMIT AVOIDS A SPLIT 
ON IRAQ, BUT DOES LITTLE ELSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 49625 
     ¶B. CAIRO 1751 
     ¶C. CAIRO 1752 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
---------------------------------- 
SHARM AL-SHEIKH SUMMIT DOES LITTLE 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher told Ambassador and 
A/DCM March 2 that he was "perplexed" by Egyptian behavior in 
calling for an extraordinary summit, then not injecting any 
new content or energy.  He said the Egyptians were totally 
passive.  The Sharm al-Sheikh Summit, he said, had the 
potential to "split the Arab League," but heads of state had 
decided not to let that happen.  Syrian President Bashar 
al-Asad, he commented, was "playing to the Arab street and 
completely supported Iraq" throughout the discussions. 
Jordan, he said, had played "a crucial role in watering down 
the language of the communique." 
 
¶2.  (S)  Responding to the Ambassador's question about the 
UAE's suggestion that Saddam Hussein and the Iraqi leadership 
resign to prevent a war, Muasher said that the suggestion 
"just came out of the blue," was circulated only as a written 
text, and provoked no serious discussion.  However, he 
commented that members of the Iraqi and UAE delegations 
exchanged heated words outside the plenary session. 
 
------------------- 
DRAFT UNSCR ON IRAQ 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S)  The Ambassador gave Muasher a copy of the 
US/UK/Spanish draft UNSCR on Iraq and outlined the U.S. 
rationale for introducing the resolution.  Muasher asked 
whether the U.S. planned to call for a vote on the resolution 
even if the U.S. determined that the draft resolution would 
not receive nine votes or would be vetoed.  The Ambassador 
responded that the U.S. was hopeful that it could secure the 
votes necessary to pass the resolution.  Muasher said his 
appraisal was that there were not nine votes for a new 
resolution. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4.  (S)  In a conversation before the Summit last week, King 
Abdullah told the Ambassador that he really did not want to 
go to the Summit because he felt it would be divisive and 
nothing good was likely to come out of it.  Muasher's 
description of the wrangling and divisions at Sharm al-Sheikh 
seem to confirm that the King's fears were well founded. 
GNEHM