This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ADANA 0040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          FEBRUARY 5, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for February 5, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  TERROR WARNING IN THE SOUTHEAST 
(Sabah)  The Turkish Armed Forces continue to 
dispatch additional troops to the Iraqi border. 
Meanwhile, the National Security Directorate warned 
the 81 provincial security directorates against 
possible terrorist attacks.  The report calls for 
intense security measures alongside routes used for 
military dispatch to the Southeast.  Major 
terrorist organizations mentioned were the Marxist- 
Leninist Communist Party (MLKP) and PKK. 
 
 
¶3.  WAR MEETING IN DIYARBAKIR 
(Milliyet)  The "Rain Operation Plan," devised to 
prevent a population movement and provide 
humanitarian assistance in the event of a possible 
operation against Iraq, was tabled again during a 
February 4 meeting in Diyarbakir.  Second Army 
Commander General Fevzi Turkeri, Regional Governor 
Gokhan Aydiner, Seventh Corps Command Lieutenant 
General Atilla Isik, and the governors of 
Diyarbakir, Mardin, Sirnak, Batman, Van, and 
Hakkari provinces, which have been tasked with 
first-degree duties, as well as the governors of 21 
other provinces who will give support to these six 
provinces, attended the meeting.  Officials from 
the Directorates of Red Crescent, Public Works, 
Health, National Education, Civil Defense, and 
Tele-com were also present.  Turkeri, Aydiner, the 
governors and officials will watch a February 5 
humanitarian assistance exercise at Sirnak's Habur 
border gate. 
 
 
¶4.  MILITARY INSPECTION AT INCIRLIK AIR BASE 
(Hurriyet)  A three-day general inspection began at 
Incirlik (Adana) Air Base's Tenth Tanker Command as 
of February 4.  An alarm was given for the Turkish 
personnel there as part of ordinary annual 
inspections.  During inspections, high-level 
military officials from Ankara observed to see if 
sufficient security measures had been taken against 
any attacks.  Efforts will be exerted to eliminate 
any shortcomings. 
 
 
¶5.  COMMANDOES IN NORTHERN IRAQ 
(Hurriyet/Radikal/Milliyet/Tercuman)  Additional 
forces have been dispatched to support Turkish 
military units deployed in northern Iraq to prevent 
the infiltration of PKK terrorists during a 
possible influx of refugees in the event of a war 
in Iraq.  Military vehicles transported commando 
units to Uludere (Sirnak) along the Iraqi border. 
They then crossed into northern Iraq to assume 
assigned duties there.  Based on intelligence that 
there are around 500 (PKK) terrorists in Iraq's 
Sinaht Valley across from Uludere, security forces 
are preparing for a large-scale operation. 
Military officials said leaves had been suspended 
to be ready for an operation as the U.S. was 
expected to launch its possible operation against 
Iraq between February 15-27.  Radikal pointed to 
expedited war preparations in military and civilian 
bureaucracy, with leaves suspended at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, as well as critical military 
units.  Mobilization duty order files have been 
updated.  Security measures have been elevated in 
such public institutions as MKE, TUPRAS, PETKIM, 
TEDAS, GAP, and around dams.  Milli Gazete reported 
the dispatch by train of heavy military equipment, 
including tanks, canons, and munitions, from the 
Trakya region to the Iraqi border. 
 
 
¶6.  FEAR OF WAR 
(Tercuman)  People in the Southeast have begun to 
take measures in preparation for a possible war in 
Iraq.  They have begun to prepare apartment 
basements or rooms in their apartments against 
chemical weapons attacks.  Residents of Kiziltepe 
(Mardin) have reportedly already prepared basements 
for a possible (chemical) attack.  Cumhuriyet 
reported there were no civilian (war) preparations 
in the Southeast, just military build-up. 
 
 
¶7.  FOUR HIZBULLAH SUSPECTS ARRESTED IN MARDIN 
(Cumhuriyet)  Acting a tip, the Mardin Security 
Directorate's Anti-Terror teams arrested four 
suspected members of Hizbullah's Ilim (Science) 
Group in Mardin.  Interrogation of the arrestees 
continues. 
 
 
¶8.  SWEDISH FOREIGN MINISTER IN DIYARBAKIR 
(Sabah/Hurriyet/Tercuman)  Swedish Foreign Minister 
Anna Lindh, whom the former government of Bulent 
Ecevit had refused to give permission to travel to 
Diyarbakir, flew to Diyarbakir on a private plane 
of the Swedish Air Force.  Diyarbakir Governor 
Ahmet Cemil Serhadli met Lindh when she arrived at 
Diyarbakir's Second Tactic Air Base.  In 
Diyarbakir, Lindh visited the Women's Center 
(KAMER), where she was briefed on KAMER activities. 
Lindh later donated USD 25,000 to the Center's 
Honor Killings Prevention Project.  Lindh said she 
was visiting Diyarbakir due to its economic and 
political problems.  After her meeting with AK 
Party leader Erdogan in Ankara, Lindh quoted 
Erdogan as saying she would see many changes in the 
region during her next visit to Diyarbakir. 
Erdogan had reportedly told her the AK Party 
government would make more investments in the 
region.  Cumhuriyet cited Lindh as saying the 
(Turkish) government had given assurances that it 
would display zero tolerance for torture. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶9.  BAS CONCERNED OVER DIE'S INFLATION FIGURE FOR 
JANUARY 
(Milliyet)  Adana Chamber of Commerce President 
Saban Bas evaluated the State Statistics 
Institute's (DIE) inflation figure for the month of 
January.  Bas said the figure had shown that no 
concessions should be made regarding (the 
government's) economic policies.  "The government 
must take all measures to prevent the inflation 
disease from spreading," he added. 
 
 
¶10.  A NEW SHOPPING CENTER IN MERSIN 
(Milliyet)  A new four-story shopping center was 
inaugurated on Mersin's Silifke road.  Republican 
People's Party (CHP) Mersin Deputy Vahit Cekmez and 
Mersin Mayor Macit Ozcan attended the inauguration 
ceremony.  The new shopping center will provide 
jobs for 100 people. 
HOLTZ