This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 003481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/IP/EUR, CA/OCS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC KSAC PTER
SUBJECT: ANKARA OSAC DISCUSSES SOFT TARGET VULNERABILITY 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 3396 
     ¶B. STATE 133022 
 
 
 ¶1.  RSO, CONS and FCS hosted a reconstituted OSAC Country 
Council on 5/27/03 to discuss the critical nature of the 
global terrorist threat and the focus on "soft" targets.  RSO 
provided an overview of the historical terrorist threat in 
Turkey, the worldwide threat from Al-Qa'ida and its network 
of terrorist organizations, and host country efforts to 
combat terrorism in Turkey.  RSO, CONS and FCS briefed the 
group on the outreach programs offered by the Embassy and the 
avenues available to pass/share security information to the 
official and private sector American citizens in Turkey.  RSO 
and CONS then reiterated the security preparedness 
information that has been passed through a series of warden 
messages on the potential for terrorist acts focused on 
"soft" targets and the need to practice good security habits 
at home and office, when traveling, visiting tourist 
destinations, etc. In light of the recent Al-Qa'ida attacks, 
and the ongoing spate of leftist terrorist bombings in 
Turkey, both official and non-official Americans must 
maintain vigilance in any location that could be considered a 
soft target. 
 
 
¶2.  The Country Council was appreciative of the overview of 
both the worldwide and Turkey-specific terrorist threat 
analysis.  The members present felt comfortable with their 
profile in the current security climate in Turkey; no members 
voiced concern over their individual security posture.  The 
council discussed the merits of clustering versus dispersing 
residential housing.  The clustered option counters the 
historical pattern of assassination attacks by Dev Sol (now 
DHKP/C) in Turkey, while dispersed housing lessens the damage 
that could be inflicted from a VBIED, the preferred Al-Qa'ida 
attack scenario.  While an individual decision, there are 
obvious drawbacks to either option in Turkey.  The Council 
discussed and voiced their unanimous approval of the USG "No 
Double Standard" policy regarding threat dissemination and 
security notices.  The consensus was that members would 
prefer more, rather than less, regarding security notices. 
RSO will maintain a distribution list of Country Council 
members as parallel means (with Consular Warden System) of 
communicating with Americans living and working in Turkey, 
and with representatives of US-affiliated businesses. 
 
 
¶3.  This initial meeting of a reconstituted Country Council 
was well received by all participants and Country Council 
meetings will be held on a quarterly basis.  The Country 
Council was especially enthused to be included in another 
information loop, whereby the Embassy can communicate with 
our private sector constituents on security matters of mutual 
interest.  RSO expects membership to swell by the next 
scheduled meeting in September. 
PEARSON