This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KATHMANDU 001430 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, PD 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: PUBLIC RELEASE OF RECOMMENDED STATEMENT 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER ASEC NP
SUBJECT: (C) NEPAL: PROPOSED PUBLIC STATEMENT CONDEMNING 
MAOIST ACTIONS LEADING TO BREAK IN CEASE-FIRE 
 
REF: (A) KATHMANDU 1413 (B) KATMANDU 1416 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
Â¶1. (C) In view of increased tension between the Government of 
Nepal and the Maoist leadership (reported reftels) and the 
extreme pressure the Maoists have placed on the already 
fragile cease-fire, Post recommends that the Department 
release a public statement should the cease-fire break and 
hostilities resume in Nepal.  Post suggests the following 
language be included in such a statement: 
 
-- Strongly condemn Maoist actions systematically violating 
the code of conduct for the cease-fire and precipitating the 
resumption of violence in Nepal.  The Maoists' unrealisitic 
pre-conditions for a third round of talks derailed the peace 
process and ignored the Government of Nepal's efforts to 
pursue a constructive dialogue. 
 
-- Urge the Maoists to accept the Government of Nepal's 
invitation to return immediately to the negotiating table.  A 
military solution to the conflict is not possible.  The U.S. 
Government believes that only a peacefully negotiated 
settlement will resolve the conflict. 
 
-- Urge both sides to respect international standards for 
human rights, including the prohibition against recruiting 
child soldiers, and to uphold international norms prohibiting 
the use of torture. 
 
-- The Maoists must stop the use of terror as a means to 
achieve political goals. 
 
-- Further violence in Nepal will contribute to the 
displacement of the Nepalese people and push back further the 
country's economic and social development.  In the end, the 
only losers in this conflict will be the Nepali people 
themselves. 
MALINOWSKI