This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO HO PA ETRD USTR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JUNE 25, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Op-ed by Rodil Rivera on Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily 
"La Tribuna" on 6/25 entitled "The Fifth Column of CAFTA". 
". plain and simple, Guatemala is acting as the fifth column 
of the U.S. negotiators, to force us to give in on the few 
points where Central America has presented some resistance. 
In other words, our Guatemalan `brothers' are helping to 
twist our arm. If there remains any doubt about it, we only 
need to read what Barbara Bowie-Whitman stated in the plain 
words of trade specialists, `If anyone wants to be more 
ambitious in its offer, we can reach an agreement faster'." 
 
"About the chance of Guatemala withdrawing its proposal, 
Regina Vargo answered for Salomon Cohen, the lead Guatemalan 
negotiator, saying, `Guatemala can't do that, because it's 
impossible to turn in a product offered with a  zero-tariff 
for one with a higher tariff. we can't go forward this way'. 
This means that this is no longer a negotiation, it is a 
mere puppet show where Vargo is a ventriloquist and Cohen 
the U.S. puppet." 
 
"Is there anything we can do against a decision already 
taken by the U.S.? Is there any chance that CAFTA could 
actually be somewhat beneficial for Honduras and Central 
America, as some people think? I don't know. I'm firmly 
convinced that this criticism may help our negotiators and 
private entrepreneurs to do the best they can to get some 
benefits from CAFTA and, at least, to exclude agricultural 
products from the agreement." 
 
 
Palmer