This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 003021 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS/GLASS, S/CT/NAVRATIL, EUR/ERA/PARKER 
NEA, INR/EC 
TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL BANKING OFFICE, EXECUTIVE OFFICE 
FOR TERRORIST FINANCING AND FINANCIAL CRIMES, OFAC (NEWCOMB) 
NSC FOR GPETERS 
BRUSSELS ALSO FOR LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2013 
TAGS: ETTC PTER KPAL XF NL EUN
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCING: DUTCH RESPONSE TO SECRETARY'S 
LETTER ON FREEZING HAMAS FUNDS 
 
REF: A. STATE 318789 
     Â¶B. THE HAGUE 2959 
 
Classified By: Classification Derived from Ref A 
 
(U)  Dutch Foreign Minister Jaap de Hoop Scheffer signed the 
following letter to Secretary Powell at the end of November. 
MFA pouched the letter to the Dutch Embassy in Washington for 
formal delivery.  Department should receive a hard copy in 
the next couple of weeks. 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF LETTER TO SECRETARY POWELL 
 
(C) Thank you for your letter of November 18, 2003 regarding 
the important issue of tackling Hamas funding by charities. 
 
(C) Let me assure you that the Netherlands is deeply aware of 
the importance of severing all links between terrorist 
organizations and their financial supporters.  We are firmly 
committed to effective action, in particular, against front 
organizations and fundraisers.  We, in fact, took the lead 
within the EU by successfully advocating that the Al Aqsa 
Foundation, which was providing financial support to Hamas, 
be placed on the EU freeze list. 
 
(C) Within the EU, we consistently seek to act against 
organizations or individuals who support Hamas or any other 
organization on the EU freeze list.  The main issue here is 
to obtain evidence that will hold up in court.  For this 
reason, it is of paramount importance that the U.S. and EU 
coordinate their activities as closely as possible, through 
appropriate channels.  We will need to keep improving our 
flows of information.  The Dutch presidency of the EU in 2004 
will give us an extra impetus to achieve results in this area. 
 
END TEXT OF LETTER 
SOBEL