This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR OFAC FOR DAVID MILLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN-BASED COMPANY REPEATS OFAC LICENSE REQUEST 
 
REF: A) AMMAN 2374 B) 03/17/03 OFAC LETTER FROM MILLS 
     TO DCM 
 
 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY 
 
Â¶1.  (SBU) In response to letter delivered APRIL 16 as 
requested in REF B, recipient Dr. Muwaffak Haddadin, Director 
General, Arab Company for Drug Industries and Medical 
Appliances (ACIDMA) asked that we pass along his response on 
behalf of the company addressed to OFAC's David Mills. 
Haddadin told us that he presented the letter to the 
company's Board of Directors, and subsequently the Board 
voted to resubmit the request.  Original will be sent via 
pouch to OFAC.  Body of the letter follows: 
 
Begin text: 
 
Thank you for your letter FAC NO. IQ-210714 dated March 10, 
2003, which was handed to me by Mr. Gregory G. Garramone, 
Economic Officer, Embassy of the United States of America in 
Amman, Jordan. 
 
In the light of the new developments in Iraq, and the new 
position of the American Government to lift the sanctions on 
Iraq, the Arab Company for Drug Industries and Medical 
Appliances (ACIDMA) would like to repeat its request for a 
specific license to unblock funds in the amount of US 
$4,464,726.50 from the blocked account of Rafidain Bank at 
the Bank of New York as per its letter to the U.S. Department 
of Treasury No.3/2/249 dated January 20, 2003 (copy attached 
for easy reference). 
 
Thanking you for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Dr. Muwaffak J. Haddadin 
ACDIMA/Director General 
 
End text. 
GNEHM