This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 007329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS JO UNGA UNRWA
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE TO JORDAN ON UNRWA RESOLUTION IN UNGA: 
JORDAN SEEK USG POSITION ON PALESTINIAN RESOLUTIONS 
 
REF: STATE 311971 
 
Classified By: DCM David M. Hale for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
¶1.   (C)  PolCouns delivered ref points and a copy of the 
latest U.S. draft UNGA UNRWA resolution November 9 to Ali 
al-Ayed, Director of Foreign Minister Muasher's office, and 
Samer Naber, Head of the MFA Legal Department.  PolCouns 
thanked Ayed and Naber for Jordan's positive role in the 
discussions thus far in New York, and asked for Jordan's 
continued assistance.  He also asked that Jordan vote for the 
U.S.-proposed resolution, even if it means passing five UNRWA 
resolutions. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ayed and Naber said that Jordan supports the U.S. 
goal of consolidating UNRWA resolutions and is pleased with 
the progress made thus far in discussions and the cooperative 
attitude shown by all sides.  Jordan's highest priority in 
these discussions, they continued, is to make sure that the 
rights of those persons displaced during the 1967 war are 
enshrined in the UNRWA resolution.  Given that Jordan has a 
very large Palestinian refugee population, they argued, 
Jordan must make sure that the rights of this population are 
protected. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Naber described the four Palestinian draft 
resolutions as "at times excessive" in their references to 
issues -- like the Fourth Geneva Convention -- that are 
adequately covered elsewhere.  Ayed and Naber asked whether 
the USG would support, oppose, or abstain on each of the four 
Palestinian drafts.  U.S. support (or lack of opposition) 
would make it easier to garner support for the U.S. 
resolution, they argued.  They promised to discuss the issue 
further internally and respond before the vote on November 11. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  The Jordanians were clearly hoping to hear that the 
USG could support -- or at least abstain on -- some or all of 
the Palestinian drafts.  This would make it much easier for 
Jordan to support the U.S. consolidated resolution.  Please 
advise how we should respond to this question. 
 
Visit the U.S. Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM