This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 003312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ARP FOR CLAIRE KANESHIRO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ETRD IZ KU
SUBJECT: MISSING KUWAIT AIRWAYS CORPORATION SPARE PARTS 
 
REF: KUWAIT 2954 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1.  Action request at para 3. 
 
¶2.  Reftel describes GOK and Kuwait Airways Corporation (KAC) 
efforts to recover KAC spare parts reported looted by the 
former regime in Baghdad during its occupation of Kuwait.  In 
para 4 below we provide the text of a letter from KAC dated 
30 June sent to the Ambassador via the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.  The letter follows up on earlier GOK and KAC action 
and requests that a KAC technical team be permitted to travel 
to Baghdad to recover the firm's spare parts in coordination 
with appropriate CPA authorities. 
 
¶3.  Action request: Post asks for prompt CPA response to GOK 
request for assistance in repatriating KAC property from 
Baghdad. 
 
¶4.  Begin verbatim text of letter sent to the Ambassador from 
Kuwait Airways Corporation dated June 30, 2003: 
 
H.E. The Ambassador 
U.S. Embassy 
Kuwait 
 
Dear Mr. Jones 
 
As you may know, Kuwait Airways Corporation "KAC" which is 
solely owned by the Government of the State of Kuwait, lost 
most of its stock of Aircraft spare parts, engines, and 
equipments as a result of the unlawful take over and 
conversion acts by Iraqi Airways Company "IAC", during the 
invasion of the State of Kuwait in 1990-91. 
 
As it is worth mentioning that, after the liberation of 
Kuwait, IAC returned some of these spares through the United 
Nation's Sanctions Commission, the fact remains that the 
major part of KAC spares was never retrieved.  The Government 
of Kuwait was informed lately by KAC Management that truthful 
sources indicated that part of the KAC lost spares are laid 
in Baghdad International Airport and specifically in IAC 
bonded spares stores and that other considerable quantities 
of expensive spares were loaded by direct orders of high IAC 
officials in 6 containers and dispersed in two locations in 
Baghdad suburban area, so to be kept away from the U.S. 
Forces. 
 
To the effect, the Government of the State of Kuwait would 
highly appreciate your kind assistance in taking the 
appropriate measures to advise the U.S. Civil Authorities in 
Iraq to enable KAC recuperating its lost spares that are 
located in Baghdad Intl. Airport (IAC Stores) and in other 
locations in Baghdad. 
 
The Government of the State of Kuwait will arrange, upon your 
prompt and positive reply, for a KAC Technical Team to reach 
Baghdad and liaise with the U.S. Forces in a joint team, in 
order to locate, identify and transport -as soon as possible- 
to Kuwait, all spares that are identified and proven to be 
KAC property according to the KAC List of Lost Spares that 
will be presented as evidence on their undisputed property 
ship. 
 
END text. 
 
¶6.  Minimize considered 
JONES