This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 001337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/FO, NEA/NGA, NEA/ARP, IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PREF EAID IZ
SUBJECT: (C) TFIZ01: GCC TO MEET 4/15 ON AID TO IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 89192 
 
Classified By: (U) AMBASSADOR RICHARD H. JONES; REASON: 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  The GCC Foreign Ministers meeting in Kuwait 
April 7 expressed support for the security of Kuwait, and 
affirmed the organization's readiness to provide humanitarian 
aid to Iraq.  The Ministers decided that the GCC will discuss 
the subject of aid to Iraq in Riyadh on April 15, apparently 
at Ambassador level.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) PolChief delivered reftel demarche April 8 to MFA 
Deputy Director for Americas Ayham al-Omar.  (Ambassador had 
previously discussed the UN's Flash Appeal with Minister of 
State for Foreign Affairs Shaykh Dr. Mohammed al-Sabah.) 
Ayham gave a brief readout of the Ministerial, which was an 
extraordinary session held at Kuwait's request.  He also 
shared the communique, which affirmed the GCC's support for 
Kuwait and condemned the Iraqi missile attacks on this 
country.  It called for "the international community, 
represented in the United Nations, to undertake a quick and 
effective positive move which would safeguard and ensure the 
futur of Iraq, its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and 
the safety of the Iraqis." 
 
¶3.  (C) The communique did not specifically mention UAE 
President Shaykh Zayid's initiative calling on Saddam to step 
down to avoid war, but Kuwait's First Deputy Prime Minister 
and Foreign Minister, Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmed, praised that 
"courageous" initiative in his speech. 
 
¶4.  (C) The communique expressed the willingness of GCC 
states "to contribute to the extension of the necessary 
humanitarian support to the Iraqi people and to contribute to 
anything that would alleviate and ease their sufferings and 
meet their various humanitarian needs."  According to MFA's 
Department of GCC Affairs, the Ministers decided that the 
Council will discuss the subject of aid to Iraq in Riyadh 
next Tuesday, April 15.  Our contact thought the meeting 
would be at Ambassador level. 
JONES