This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: AMBASSADOR RAISES U.S. CONCERNS ABOUT 
JORDANIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF IRAQ WITH FOREIGN MINISTER 
 
REF: FBIS GMP20030407000170 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
AMBASSADOR: JORDANIAN PRESS PRESENTS A BIASED PICTURE 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  The Ambassador raised with Foreign Minister Marwan 
Muasher April 8 continued U.S. concerns over the unbalanced 
coverage in the Jordanian media of events in Iraq.  MFA 
Officer Samer Dabbas and PolCouns also sat in.  The 
Ambassador cited for Muasher several examples of factually 
incorrect coverage in the Jordanian media of alleged 
coalition military actions, as well as examples of a 
distinctly pro-Iraq slant in coverage that is otherwise 
factually true.  Such coverage only fans the flames of 
anti-U.S. hatred and could make it more difficult for the 
U.S. to sustain its important programs in the long term. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
MUASHER: LOCAL PRESS REFLECTS POPULAR ATTITUDES 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  (S)  Muasher said that he, too, is concerned with the 
"hysterical" nature of the local press, not because it is 
leading popular opinion, but rather because it reflects the 
strong popular opposition to the war.  The GOJ has "done as 
much as we can do" to influence the mostly-independent local 
media coverage of Iraq through Jordan television and the 
government-controlled al-Rai newspaper.  He noted, however, 
that local Arabic papers had not picked up an interview he 
had given April 7 in which he talked about post-war Iraq. 
"It is too sensitive yet even to admit there will be a 
different Iraqi government after the war."  He said the GOJ 
remains seized with the task of managing public opinion in 
the longer term. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
U.S. CAN DO THINGS TO CHANGE ARAB MINDS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S)  Muasher admitted to personal concern over the 
possibility that strongly negative anti-U.S. views could 
affect U.S. programs in Jordan.  "I have never seen 
anti-American feeling so strong."  The U.S. has the power, he 
argued, to change public opinion by its actions.  He made 
several suggestions. 
 
--  "Don't make this look like an occupation."  One statement 
by a senior USG official about the need for a permanent 
military presence in Iraq "can wipe out all the good 
statements from President Bush and Secretary Powell" about 
the U.S. desire to leave Iraq as soon as possible. 
 
--  Give the UN a role.  In the Arab world, Muasher argued, 
the UN stamp on post-Iraq governance will convey a degree of 
popular legitimacy that the U.S. and UK cannot.  (Note:  The 
official news agency Petra carried reports of a visit by King 
Abdullah to the Foreign Ministry April 7 (ref) in which the 
King is quoted as asking Muasher to work to "prevent the USA 
and Britain from administering Iraq's affairs alone."  End 
note.) 
 
--  Give Arabs a role as well.  Muasher recommended close 
consultation with Arab governments leading to a turnover of 
authority to a true Iraqi government "in a reasonable period." 
 
--  Make concrete progress on the MEPP.  Publication of the 
roadmap is a "great" first step, but the U.S. will have to be 
seen as pressing Israel to make concrete concessions in order 
to win back any Arab public trust. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
JORDAN TO SEEK POST WAR CONSULTATIONS WITH U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶4.  (S)  Muasher said that he hopes to travel to Washington 
to consult on post-war arrangement and MEPP issues soon after 
the war ends.  King Abdullah also hopes to visit the U.S. at 
an appropriate time in the not too distant future.  One of 
the issues of importance to Jordan will be the role of INC 
leader Ahmad Chalabi in post-war Iraq.  Chalabi, Muasher 
said, is accused of serious financial crimes in Jordan, and 
his presence in a senior position in a new Iraqi government 
will cause serious problems for the GOJ. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5.  (S)  The GOJ hears and understands our concern regarding 
unbalanced media coverage in Jordan.  It is a concern that -- 
in their own interests -- they share themselves.  Their 
willingness to challenge that coverage directly, however, is 
circumscribed by the strong popular opposition to the war 
which has inspired the coverage in the first place. 
GNEHM