This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 002954 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ARP FOR CLAIRE KANESHIRO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD IZ KU
SUBJECT: MISSING KUWAIT AIRWAYS CORPORATION SPARE PARTS 
 
 
¶1.  After a brief trip into Iraq in June, the GOK believes 
it has located spare parts belonging to Kuwait Airways 
which were looted by the former Regime in Baghdad during 
the occupation of Kuwait.  GOK wants to recoup these 
parts.  We received the following Diplomatic note (in 
Arabic) containing the Kuwaiti request as well as 
photographs of the equipment and spread sheets of the 
missing parts and identifying numbers.  We will pouch 
photos and compact disc to NEA/ARP.  UNSCR 1483 mandates 
cooperation in the return of stolen property to Kuwait. 
Please advise how to reply to the GOK. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of informal Embassy translation of Kuwaiti 
Diplomatic note: 
 
"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sends its compliments to 
the Embassy of the United States of America and in 
reference to the memorandum of the ministry dated 25 June 
2003 which contains a statement about the spare parts that 
belong to the Kuwait Airways Corporation that were stolen 
by the previous Iraqi regime during the brutal occupation 
of the State of Kuwait, and in reference to the agreement 
that occurred lately between his excellency the Deputy 
Foreign Minister and his excellency the Charge d'Affaires 
of your respected embassy on the importance for the Embassy 
to receive a statement (record) of the spare parts that the 
Iraqi regime stole along with their serial numbers. 
 
We attach for you a complete and reliable report, which 
contains complete information that is specific to the spare 
parts with descriptions and quantity; we also attach to you 
photographic pictures of the spare parts that we came 
across lately.  Also the Ministry requested in its earlier 
communiqu to the respected embassy for it to extend its 
efforts to those American sides specializing in Iraq to 
safeguard the (spare parts) and return them by way of the 
specialized committee at the United Nations. 
 
Therefore this Ministry would be grateful if the Embassy 
would please communicate to the civilian administration in 
Iraq (the request) to facilitate the task of the technical 
team representing the Kuwait Airways Corporation in finding 
those spare parts belonging to it, and also in addition, to 
safeguard the (spare parts) until their return by way of 
the POW committee (sic) and the return of Kuwaiti assets." 
 
END Text. 
 
¶3.  Minimize considered. 
JONES