This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 007443 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR NP, T, AND EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP MNUC PARM PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY SUPPORTS PSI AND WANTS TO PARTICIPATE IN 
DECEMBER MEETING IN WASHINGTON 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 6112 
     ¶B. STATE 272470 
     ¶C. ANKARA 5681 
     ¶D. STATE 254587 
 
 
¶1. This is an urgent action request.  MFA Disarmament Head of 
Department Bulent Meric told PolMilOff December 4 that after 
much consideration the GOT had decided to support the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).  Nevertheless, it 
still had many questions about what partnership entailed. 
Meric said the GOT expected to be invited to the Dec. 16-17 
meeting in Washington to learn more about it. 
 
 
¶2. Later December 4, the Embassy received the following dip 
note: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents it compliments to the Embassies of the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Italy, France, Spain, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States of America and with reference 
to the joint initiative of the Embassies of the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Italy, the Republic of France, Spain and 
the United Kingdom dated September 23, 2003 and the US 
Embassy's fax message dated September 26, 2003 concerning the 
Proliferation Security Initiative, has the honor to inform 
the esteemed Embassies that the Government of Turkey has 
decided to support, in principle, the abovementioned 
initiative. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs would be most pleased to 
receive further information on the modalities of 
participation in the Proliferation Security Initiative as 
well as an invitation to the forthcoming Experts Meeting, 
which is envisaged to be held in December 2003, in the United 
States of America. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassies 
of the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, the Republic of 
France, Spain, the United kingdom and the United States of 
America the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
 
¶2. Action Request: Please advise whether the GOT can be 
invited to the Dec. 16-17 meeting and if so, issue an 
invitation letter. 
EDELMAN