This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR IS IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN-IRAQ:  POLICE TRAINING, DEBT, CHALABI, 
EMBASSY SECURITY IN BAGHDAD 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  Foreign Minister Muasher said October 5 that Jordan 
will continue its pragmatic, cooperative relationship with 
the Iraqi Governing Council (IGC) and will send a ministerial 
representative to the Madrid donors' meeting.  However, he 
expressed concern that an escalating war of words with IGC 
member Ahmed Chalabi could negatively affect Jordan-Iraq 
relations, and asked for the U.S. to intervene with Chalabi 
and explain the importance of Jordan for Iraq and the U.S. 
Muasher said he wants to return the Jordanian Charge to 
Baghdad, and will send in a security team soon to examine 
options for a new chancery.  He asked for CPA assistance and 
greater security protection for the new facility.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
JORDAN WANTS TO TALK TRADE, DEBT 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S)  The Ambassador met with Foreign Minister Marwan 
Muasher October 5 (other topics septels, notal).  Muasher's 
Office Director Ali al-Ayed and PolCouns sat in.  The 
Ambassador noted that the GOJ and CPA were near agreement on 
a memorandum to provide police training in Jordan for as many 
as 30,000 Iraqi police cadets, and outlined U.S. plans to 
accomplish the training.  He mentioned that plans were also 
under way for Jordan to facilitate similar training for the 
new Iraqi Army. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Muasher said the GOJ will maintain its policy of 
dealing pragmatically and productively with the CPA and IGC. 
In this context, Prime Minister Ali Abul Ragheb wants to make 
contact with members of the IGC or interim Iraqi ministers to 
discuss trade and debt issues.  He said Iraqi interim Foreign 
Minister Hoshyar Zebari had told him on the margins of the 
UNGA last week that the IGC is ready to discuss these issues. 
 Muasher said that Jordan would be represented by either 
Finance Minister Michel Marto or Planning Minister Bassam 
Awadallah at the upcoming Madrid donors' meeting, where 
Jordan would be willing to brief on its plans to support 
Iraqi police training. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
"WE'RE WITH THE GOVERNING COUNCIL, EXCEPT ONE GUY" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (S)  Muasher next asked the Ambassador how Jordan should 
handle the presence of INC leader Ahmed Chalabi on the IGC. 
Although Jordan cannot drop its bank fraud charges against 
Chalabi, the GOJ wants to put the public sniping with Chalabi 
"behind us" and does not want it to affect Jordan's 
relationship with Iraq.  Unfortunately, he continued, Chalabi 
has people throughout the Iraqi government -- including in 
ministries of great importance to Jordan, like Health. 
Muasher expressed apprehension that Chalabi may instruct his 
supporters not to deal with Jordan, to the detriment of both 
countries.  Muasher asked that the U.S. try to convince 
Chalabi of the importance of Jordan's relationship with Iraq 
and the U.S.  "Jordan is your friend and ally," he argued, 
"and Chalabi needs to know that." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
BAD SECURITY HINDERING RETURN OF EMBASSY STAFF TO BAGHDAD 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶5.  (S)  Muasher said that, given the breadth and growing 
depth of Jordan's relations with the new Iraqi government, he 
needs to return his charge d'affaires to Baghdad as soon as 
possible.  However, the current embassy facility -- the 
former Ambassador's residence -- is unsafe and inappropriate 
for use as a chancery.  He said he would send a team from the 
MFA and General Intelligence Directorate (GID) to Baghdad in 
the near future to locate and rent a more appropriate 
facility.  Jordan is willing to provide "ten or twenty guys" 
to provide some of the security at a new embassy building, 
but "I can't send tanks and rocket launchers."  Given 
Jordan's growing importance in Iraq and the August bombing of 
its Embassy, "I can't see why you can't provide us more 
security.  With our actions (in support of Iraq and the 
coalition), we are developing real enemies there." 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  The Jordanian Charge in Baghdad, Dimae Haddad 
(currently visiting Amman), confirmed to PolCouns October 6 
that he plans to return to Baghdad on October 12 with an 
interagency committee to provide Muasher with recommendations 
on possible new embassy sites.  He hopes to work with CPA, 
the Iraqi police, and ORCA Baghdad on this project. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (S)  Given the growing involvement of Jordan in support 
of the coalition, CPA, and the IGC, we encourage CPA to work 
with the Jordanians to secure a new embassy site when they 
locate one. 
 
¶8.  (U)  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified website at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM