This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 001638 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
EUR FOR PASCOE; NEA FOR CROCKER; ALSO FOR EUR/SE AND NEA/NGA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/13/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ: CENTCOM PROPOSAL FOR US-TURKEY-IRAQI KURD 
POLICY CELL TO DECONFLICT FORCES AND AVOID CONFRONTATIONS 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador W. Robert Pearson.  Reasons 1.5 
B and D. 
 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  See para 4. 
 
 
¶2. (S) DCM was contacted March 14 by CENTCOM POLAD, who said 
that CDR CENTCOM wanted, as the minimum acceptable 
deliverable for upcoming talks with Turks and Iraqi Kurds, 
the establishment of a 24-hour/day policy-level cell staffed 
by US, Turkish and Iraqi Kurdish reps.  The cell would 
deconflict forces, clarify rumors, and ensure that no 
unintended confrontations took place. CENTCOM said the cell 
could be based wherever it would be most effective, so long 
as it had access to information on a real-time basis. 
 
 
¶3. (S) Comment:  While we believe there is significant merit 
to a process to try to prevent misunderstanding spinning out 
of control in northern Iraq, we are concerned the Turks will 
not react positively, and we lack any details.  The Turks 
have told us in the past that they will not share their 
military planning with the Iraqi Kurds.  They will react 
badly to any arrangement that implies equality between the 
Turkish reps and reps of the Iraqi Kurdish parties.  In 
addition, the Turks are likely to insist on the participation 
of an ITF rep, which could complicate matters in terms of 
sharing sensitive information.  We also do not know whether 
this arrangement has been discussed with the Kurds or any 
other parties in advance. 
 
 
¶4. (S) Post urgently seeks Washington guidance on the CENTCOM 
proposal in time to 
deploy during Amb. Khalilzad's March 14-15 bilaterals with 
the Turks. 
PEARSON