This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 002742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL ASEC YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: FM QIRBI ON MOAYED EXTRADITION 
 
REF: SANAA 2741 
 
Classified By: CDA Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) On November 18, FM Qirbi called in Charge to discuss 
the 11/16 Moayed extradition and several other subjects 
(septels).  Pol/Econ Deputy (notetaker) also joined. 
 
¶2. (C) Qirbi was low-key, stating that the ROYG wished to 
protect Moayed's rights as a Yemeni citizen.  He expressed 
the hope that Moayed would receive decent treatment in prison 
("better than he received in Germany"), and said the ROYG 
would hope to receive "the full file on the accusations and 
evidence" now that Moayed is in U.S. custody.  Qirbi noted 
that the Moayed case could be included in upcoming dialogue 
to address mutual concerns in CT cooperation (septel). 
 
¶3. (C) The Charge observed that public reaction to Moayed,s 
extradition had so far been muted.  Qirbi agreed, but 
mentioned a "demonstration" by tribesmen related to Moayed in 
front of the Presidential Palace on November 17.  The Charge 
thanked Qirbi for the ROYG's provision of security 
cooperation with the Embassy in conjunction with the Moayed 
extradition. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: Recent media reports, including an 11/17 
al-Jazeera TV interview, have included more activist 
statements by Qirbi -- e.g. the ROYG will pay for Moayed,s 
legal defense -- but his approach to Charge was mild and 
understated.  Friday prayers on 11/21 could see some protest 
(e.g. in Moayed,s home district in Sanaa), but public 
reaction to the extradition has been virtually invisible to 
date.  The Embassy,s EAC (septel) accordingly decided not to 
institute new restrictions for the 11/20-21 weekend. 
MISENHEIMER