This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/ENV, WHA/CAN (RUNNING) 
 
EPA FOR OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (CHRISTICH) 
 
INTERIOR FOR FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE (GLOMAN) 
 
COMMERCE FOR 4320/MAC/WH/ON/OIA/BENDER 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV CA
SUBJECT:  Invasive Species: IJC speaks to Parliamentary 
Committee 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. The American Co-Chair of the International Joint 
Commission (IJC) sought the support of members of the House 
of Commons Fisheries and Oceans committee for a joint US-GoC 
reference to the IJC on the Great Lakes invasive species 
problem. First impressions are that the committee is pre- 
occupied with other matters and will not be the Commons 
committee to push the GoC toward endorsing a joint 
reference.  End summary. 
 
¶2. Dennis Schornack, Chair of the U.S. Section of the IJC 
briefed members of the House of Commons Standing Committee 
on Fisheries and Oceans on February 11th concerning Alien 
Invasive Species.  Schornack's comments are provided in full 
(as well as statements by Canadian Section Chair Herb Gray 
and Canadian Commissioner Robert Gourd) at the following IJC 
web address: 
 
http://www.ijc.org/ijcweb-e.html 
 
¶3. The bottom-line message from Schornack to the members of 
the committee was: invasive species are the number one 
threat to the economic and biological integrity of the Great 
Lakes and the IJC continues to call for a reference from the 
two governments to coordinate and harmonize bi-national 
efforts to stop this threat. (Such a reference was first 
recommended in September 2002 in the IJC's 11th Biennial 
Report on Great Lakes Water Quality.) 
 
4 With respect to the most up-to-date assessment of what 
action needs to be taken to confront this challenge, Mr. 
Schornack noted the recent report published by the 
International Association for Great Lakes Research (IAGLR). 
It's called "Research and Management Priorities for Aquatic 
Invasive Species in the Great Lakes" and is available at: 
http://www.iaglr.org/scipolicy/ais/ 
 
¶5. This was only the second set of hearings by this 
committee on the issue. The first hearing, on February 6th, 
featured Chris Goddard, Executive Secretary of the Great 
Lakes Fisheries Commission. At the end of February, the 
Committee expects to hear from representatives of the 
Canadian Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Transport 
Canada and Environment Canada.  According to the Clerk of 
the committee, given other priorities, the earliest date for 
the Committee to issue a report on invasive species will be 
the end of April. 
 
-------------------------- 
Impact of IJC presentation 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. In Emboff's opinion, there was no evidence that the IJC's 
presentation will elicit a strong effort from this committee 
or lead to GoC support for a reference to the IJC. There are 
those on the committee who feel this is a significant issue 
demanding immediate government focus, but it is not clear 
this particular committee will take the lead in pressing the 
GoC for action on invasive species. 
 
¶7. The government has had an "action plan" on invasive 
species since 1995 (put in place in response to the 
Convention on Biological Diversity) that names the 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Environment Canada and 
Transport Canada as the responsible agencies.  The problem, 
however, according to the Commissioner of Environment and 
Sustainable Development (part of the GoC Auditor General's 
organization), is that none of these departments is willing 
to take a leading role to ensure that the action plan 
results in concrete actions.  Likewise, many members of the 
Fisheries and Oceans Committee believe that another 
committee, perhaps Environment, should take the lead on this 
issue. 
 
¶8. There was one suggestion, however, which we expect to 
appear in the Committee's final report.  The Canadian Chair, 
Herb Gray, made the eminently sensible recommendation that 
one cabinet Minister should be named as the lead Minister on 
Invasive Species and have the power of the Prime Minister 
behind him or her to move departments forward in a 
coordinated fashion.  This might energize GoC action on 
Invasive species - and reduce the impetus for a reference to 
the IJC. 
 
¶9. Comment: Although the IJC presentation to the Committee 
may not be critical in the GoC's decision process, it does 
fit with the generally greater emphasis this issue is 
getting in Ottawa.  We continue to receive "feelers" from 
DFAIT about their interest in consulting with Washington on 
IJC's proposal for a joint reference, as well as addressing 
the broader issue of dealing with alien invasive species in 
the "North American" context.  End comment. 
 
Cellucci