This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV SENV CA AA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S ACTION ON ASIA PULP AND PAPER 
 
REF: A. A) JAKARTA 2431 
 
     ¶B. B) OTTAWA 484 
     ¶C. C) STATE 44188 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU)  On February 28 Finoff touched base with Canada's 
Department of Foreign Affairs (DFAIT) for an update on GOC 
action with regard to proposals on Asia Pulp and Paper 
restructuring.  The joint letter to President Megawati to be 
drafted by the Canadian Embassy in Jakarta (ref A) has been 
cleared in Ottawa and is being circulated among the 
participating embassys in Jakarta.  The GOC hopes to have the 
clearance process completed by early next week, but 
understands there are likely to be changes to the text. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The possibility of calling in Indonesia's 
ambassador to Ottawa to protest handling of the case is under 
consideration, but a final decision has not been made. 
According to DFAIT, the GOC "might go that route." 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The Export Development Corporation, Canada's ECA, 
said that they are "not that strongly contemplating" a firm 
decision to take private corporations off cover and are not 
planning to put anything in writing.  He added that he 
believes, speaking generally, that most ECAs are reluctant to 
draw a line in the sand that continues for an indefinite 
period.  "Actions speak," and they are not thinking of doing 
anything publicly.  EDC believes the next step is the letter 
to President Megawati, and they'll see what happens after 
that. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Comment: Today's conversations in Ottawa confirm 
the view (Ref B) that GOC action and decision making on this 
issue are driven by the Canadian Embassy in Jakarta.  EDC 
does not have a presence in Jakarta and DFAIT appears to be 
relying on the Ambassador's judgment.  EDC, which operates as 
a private company, showed the hesitation about discussing 
proprietary matters that would be expected of a banker 
talking about a client. There seems to be a strong 
inclination on the part of the GOC to await the response to 
the joint letter to Megawati before moving on to other steps. 
 End comment. 
CELLUCCI