This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291428Z Jul 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 004713 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN STOCK OF ASSISTANCE TO IRAQ 
 
REFS: A) STATE 214593; B) USUN NY 1718 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (u)  Jordan has been extremely forthcoming with 
humanitarian and other assistance for Iraq in the months 
following the end of major combat operations.  As requested 
ref (a), below is an illustrative (but we believe not an 
exhaustive) list of material assistance provided to Iraq by 
the GOJ.  In addition to this list, the GOJ and Jordanian 
private sector have been actively supporting a whole host 
of rebuilding activities, from hosting CPA sectoral 
meetings and conferences to consulting with CPA and CIC 
officials on reconstruction and assistance issues to 
facilitating transportation of third-country assistance 
through the port of Aqaba and the Trebil border crossing to 
assisting with refugee flows. 
 
¶2.  (u)  Jordan wants to be a key partner in the rebuilding 
effort for the foreseeable future, and we expect the GOJ to 
back that desire with continued provision of material and 
technical assistance.  (Note:  Due to the abbreviated 
timeline for ref a tasker, most donations do not have a 
dollar value attached.  In many cases, attaching such a 
value would be guesswork at best.  End note.)  Information 
on Iraqi assets will be provided septel. 
 
¶3.  (sbu)  Begin list of Contributions: 
 
Al Fallujah, Iraq:  For humanitarian purposes only, the 
Jordanian Armed Forces Medical Personnel set up and ran a 
field hospital in Al Fallujah, during the war and post 
conflict.  This hospital has treated over 50,000 patients 
to date (approximate cost to run hospital per 
month...$210,000 pharmaceuticals;  $93,800 consumable 
medicals). 
 
Baghdad, Iraq:  For humanitarian purposes only, the 
Jordanian Ministry of Health donated over 11 semi-trailer 
truck loads of medical supplies, which Jordanian Armed 
Forces Personnel and Personnel from HACC-West escorted to 
Baghdad, Iraq during the war.  These medical supplies were 
delivered to the Iraqi Ministry of Health in Baghdad. 
 
Al Rutbah, Iraq:  For humanitarian purposes only, the 
Jordanian Armed Forces Medical Personnel along with the 
Jordanian Ministry of Health, per our request, performed a 
vaccination program for over 4,000 children in Ar Rutbah, 
Iraq. 
 
Al Najaf, Iraq:  Jordanian Armed Forces Medical Personnel 
accompanied an Indian Medical team and HACC-West personnel 
to coordinate with CPA and then recon hospitals in An Najaf 
to participate in CENTCOM's "Adopt a Hospital."  The 
Indians and Jordanians are adopting the pediatric wing of a 
maternity hospital in An Najaf, Iraq.  The total 
contribution for this program from India and Jordan will be 
between $10,000,000 to $15,000,000 dollars in personnel, 
supplies, and equipment.  This project will begin after the 
first week of August.  The split of personnel and costs 
between India and Jordan should be approximately 85/15. 
 
Iraq/Jordan Border:  The Jordanian Ministry of Interior and 
Customs Directorate have increased the size of their staff 
to operate the border 24 hours a day and has waived all 
customs fees for humanitarian goods destined for Iraq. 
 
Jordanian Crisis Management Center (CMC):  was stood up at 
General Head Quarters (GHQ) to assist and coordinate the 
flow of humanitarian aid into Iraq.  This center assisted 
the start up of the Al Fallujah Field Hospital, the Baghdad 
medical convoys, the Ar Rutbah vaccination program, WFP 
supply convoys, Jordanian Hashemite Charity Organization 
medical convoys, visa coordination with the ministry of 
interior for incoming Iraqi medical cases in need of 
advanced medical treatments in Amman.  The CMC also acted 
as a coordination center for IOs/ NGOs who needed 
assistance while operating in Jordan for their Iraqi 
assistance projects. 
 
Al Rutbah:  the Jordanian Ministry of Planning donated 16 
tons of LPG (cooking gas) to Ar Rutbah. 
 
Jordan Telecom Fund-Internet Bus:  The Jordan Telcom Fund 
(a government funded NGO) spent approximately 40 days in 
the towns of Ar Rutbah and Ar Ramadi.  The bus is a mobile 
Internet lab that was used to educate the local community 
and children on the Internet. 
 
Jordan Ministry of Planning is coordinating a large cross- 
ministry donation to the CPA for the purpose of providing 
significant expertise to support the CPA Ministries and 
their missions. 
 
Security assistance:  Jordan is coordinating directly with 
the CPA Ministry of Interior to provide assistance in the 
form of police training. 
 
Jordan Ministry of Interior worked closely with the US 
Department of State and with the UNHCR to establish Iraqi 
Refugee Camps within Jordan. 
 
Jordan CAA agreed to boost its radar capacity to project 
into Western Iraq to assist in the restarting of civil 
aviation in Iraq. 
 
Queen Rania Fund:  Agreed to accept and pay for treatment 
of several severely ill or injured Iraqi children. 
GNEHM