This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005330 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MCISAAC, CA/OCS/ACS/WHA HALDANE, 
OBO/PE/DE/CSB DAI OH & HAO BUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI EAIR EWWT CASC DR
SUBJECT: EARTHQUAKE AFTERSHOCKS AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5118 
 
 ¶1.  Aftershocks from the earthquake that hit the Dominican 
Republic on September 22 (reftel) continue to be felt in the 
northern region of the country.  More than 200 aftershocks 
have been reported, measuring up to 5.1 on the Richter Scale. 
 The original quake and the aftershocks have produced damage 
estimates ranging from RD $500 to 700 million (US $16.7 to 
23.4 million).  Thus far, President Mejia has designated RD 
$100 million (US$3.3 million) for rebuilding in the Puerto 
Plata area, RD $50 million (US$1.6 million) of which will go 
to reconstruction efforts for the GODR Justice Building and 
the regional campus of the Autonomous University of Santo 
Domingo. 
 
¶2.  Damages were greatest in the northern and central cities 
of Puerto Plata and Santiago.  More than 120 buildings were 
damaged in Puerto Plata, including 44 public schools, 4 
hospitals and 4 government offices.  In Santiago, 103 
building showed structural damage, including 10 government 
offices, 6 public schools and 1 hospital.  Media reports 
indicate that anywhere from 10,000 to 18,000 Dominican 
children are temporarily unable to attend school due to 
damaged buildings or buildings that have not yet been cleared 
for occupancy.  The GODR is considering the use of tents as 
temporary classrooms. 
 
¶3.  Despite the structural damage and the severity of the 
earthquake, injuries were minimal with fewer than 50 people 
seeking treatment.  The GODR is attributing three deaths to 
the quake, one from fatal injuries received in the collapse 
of a boarding house and two from heart attacks.  There were 
no Amcit injuries or deaths as a consequence of the 
earthquake or its aftershocks. 
KUBISKE