This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041240Z Nov 03UNCLAS ANKARA 006870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU
SUBJECT: SOUTHEASTERN PRESS SUMMARY NOV. 1-3, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  THIS CABLE IS FROM CONSULATE ADANA.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy of the 
reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  Sabah, Hurriyet, Zaman, Evrensel / In Andac village, 
Uludere Simak province, four school children died and seven 
were wounded after playing with an explosive they found in a 
field close to their school building. 
 
 
¶3.  Bolge, Evrensel / After the Adana Democratic People's 
Party (DEHAP) meeting in November 1, some groups protested in 
downtown Adana shouting slogans praising Abdullah Ocalan. 
When police tried to control the groups, they attacked parked 
cars and threw stones at police vehicles. 
 
 
¶4.  Bolge / In Ova district, Adana a group gathered and 
shouted slogans praising PKK/KADEK on November 1.  The group 
burned tires and threw stones at the police. 
 
 
¶5.  Zaman / A suspicious box in front of the U.S. Consulate 
in Adana on November 1 was inactivated by the special police 
team.  Police reported that the box did not have a bomb 
inside. 
 
 
¶6.  Zaman / Aytac Durak, mayor of Adana, announced that there 
should be a limit on immigration from the southeast provinces 
to the cities to keep the internal migration problem in 
Turkey under control. 
 
 
¶7.  Radikal, Evrensel / Necdet Ipekyuz, Diyarbakir 
Physicians' Association director, announced that his 
association applied to TRT (Turkish Radio and Television) to 
start health programs in Kurdish.  Ipekyuz also stated that 
his association is working on 5-6 minute long Kurdish TV 
clips and would be happy if those clips are approved by TRT. 
 
 
¶8.  Evrensel, Ozgur Gundem / In a meeting in Van province 
approximately 15,000 DEHAP members gathered to ask for 
permanent solution to the Kurdish problem. 
 
 
¶9.  Ozgur Gundem / Hanifi Kacar, Nevzat Alban and Kadri 
Celebi, who were detained after the October 15 attack on the 
Jandarma minibus, were arrested on October 23.  Their 
attorney, Vedat Ozkan, stated that the Jandarma and guards 
tortured Kacar, Alban and Celebi during their time in prison. 
EDELMAN