This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002063 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DRL FOR JOANNA LEVISON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PARM PHUM IZ UK NL
SUBJECT: NETHERLANDS SUPPORTS MASS GRAVES PROJECTS IN IRAQ 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 236766 
     ¶B. WITMER-LEVINSON EMAILS 8/12 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see para 3. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The GoNL is supportive of the mass graves projects 
in Iraq outlined in reftel. PolOff met with Adri van Lookpik, 
head of the MFA's Gulf States Section, on August 15 to review 
ref A requests.  Per ref B, PolOff noted that if the Danes 
and Finns provide site-assessment teams as promised, the 
Dutch commitment for a site assessment team will likely be 
unnecessary.  However, the USG needs Dutch support in the 
exhumation phase of the project.  Van Loopik stated that the 
GoNL agrees in principle to provide support for the CPA's 
exhumation phase.  He will contact the Ministry of the 
Interior's Catastrophic Identification Team (CIT) to confirm 
what personnel and resources it would be available to commit 
in September.  According to van Loopik, the CIT, which has 
worked in the former Yugoslavia and Peru, previously 
expressed interest in assisting in Iraq. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Action request:  The GoNL would like information on 
the proposed personnel make-up of the exhumation phase teams, 
as well as what tools/resources will be required.  Post 
kindly requests such information to be sent via email to 
witmerka@state.gov. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Note:  If the Danish and Finnish teams are unable 
to commit their site assessment teams, the GoNL will work to 
fulfill its previous commitment.  Until provided in reftel, 
Van Loopik did not have specifications for a site-assessment 
team.  He was therefore unable to provide a time frame for 
the mobilization of a Dutch site assessment team.  Per ref B, 
the Dutch focus will now be on staffing an exhumation phase 
team.  End Note. 
SOBEL