This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TFIZ, WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SOCI IZ HO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: ANTI-WAR PROTEST OUTSIDE EMBASSY SMALLER 
THAN EXPECTED IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 425 
 
¶1. On March 24, from about 3:45 p.m. to 5:15 p.m., a 
demonstration against the war in Iraq took place outside the 
Embassy.  The event was organized by Carlos Reyes, President 
of the Popular Block, an anti-U.S. leftist organization. 
Participating in the demonstration were other like-minded 
organizations, all of whom have taken part in past anti-U.S. 
protests (reftel).  Post initially expected up to 1,000 
protesters, but at most only 300 demonstrators participated. 
While Reyes had contacted many other organizations, including 
labor unions, in an effort to expand turn-out, attendance was 
limited to past protest groups. 
 
¶2. Two protesters threw paint at a USG facility and one 
painted a slogan before police moved in to protect the 
property.  Also, several U.S. flags were burned and three 
other men "launched" about ten loud fireworks.  The 
demonstration ended peacefully when the crowd moved on to the 
Spanish Embassy. Police presence was adequate to ensure the 
protection of USG property and personnel. 
 
¶3. COMMENT: Despite its opposition to the war in Iraq, the 
Liberal Party avoided any involvement in the demonstration. 
One leader said "we are anti-war, not anti-U.S." END COMMENT 
Palmer