This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 001821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, EAP/PD, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL VM RELFREE HUMANR
SUBJECT:  REDUCTION IN FATHER LY'S SENTENCE 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request -- see para 3. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Court officials in Ha Nam province on July 17 
confirmed media reports that the court had reduced the 
cumulative 15 years sentences of Catholic Father Nguyen Van 
Ly by five years in recognition of his "good behavior" in 
prison.  Court officials confirmed that he was in a prison 
in Ha Nam province and described him as an "obedient 
prisoner."  They indicated that this reduction was a "normal 
practice" that had not been specifically requested by Father 
Ly or his relatives.  He will also remain subject to a five 
year administrative detention order following his new 
release date in 2011. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Comment:  The GVN clearly believes that it should 
win international -- particularly, U.S. -- commendation for 
this step, which shows how little senior GVN officials yet 
understand the nature of our differences on human rights. 
This reduction in sentence is a hollow and perhaps even 
counter-productive gesture that will only remind the 
international community and members of Congress of this 
Catholic priest sentenced to 15 years in prison for nothing 
more than speaking his mind.  We should be quite frank in 
our calls for his release.  End Comment. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Suggested press guidance:  The five year reduction 
in Father Nguyen Van Ly's 15 year sentences is a hollow 
gesture, since he should never have been tried and 
convicted.  The GVN should instead immediately release 
Father Ly and all other prisoners who have done nothing more 
than exercise their right to free speech and other basic 
freedoms. 
BURGHARDT