This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IZ PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: APRIL 11 TURKISH GOVT STATEMENTS ON IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. Anatolia News Agency reported that a written press 
announcement issued by the Prime Ministry April 11 stated 
that GOT military and civilian leaders discussed developments 
in Iraq at the meeting held at the Prime Ministry this 
morning.  The situation in Kirkuk and Mosul was high on the 
agenda.  According to Anatolian News Agency the statement's 
highlights are as follows: 
 
 
-- "Upon attempts by local powers (note: the Kurds. End note) 
to take control of Kirkuk yesterday -- and despite 
understandings and agreements reached so far -- (we) have 
contacted civilian and military elements of the U.S. 
administration.  During these contacts Turkey's concerns 
regarding the region and particularly with the 
above-mentioned cities (sic) were emphasized again, and the 
U.S. was asked to fulfill the assurances that it had given to 
us;" 
 
 
-- "The U.S. side told us, as they had assured with us 
earlier, that our concerns were taken into consideration and 
that they will not allow any faits accompli to occur, (and) 
that U.S. forces are being transported to the region rapidly 
and that they will control the situation;" 
 
 
-- "The U.S. side also proposed (the establishment of) 
liaison teams of Turkish Armed Forces to join the U.S. forces 
to be deployed in the region and to observe the situation on 
the spot." 
 
 
-- The announcement also noted that Turkey has accepted the 
offer and that liaison teams will reach their areas of 
deployment around 16:00 hrs (Ankara) April 11.  It also 
stated that developments will be followed in light of the 
information provided by these teams. 
 
 
-- Moreover, "as a result of our initiatives, the local armed 
forces which had entered Kirkuk have begun to withdraw.  The 
same demand was conveyed to the U.S. regarding Mosul.  Our 
intensive contacts with U.S. officials continue." 
 
 
-- Turkey's humanitarian assistance to Iraq was also on the 
meeting agenda: "Our efforts, which will be important for the 
Iraqi people, are continuing in coordination with UN 
organizations as well as bilaterally.  Within this framework, 
more than 500 truckloads of medicine and food have crossed 
the Turkish border into northern Iraq." 
 
 
-- The announcement stated that the security situation in the 
region was also discussed.  Preparedness levels and 
fortification plans for Turkish Armed Forces units along the 
border, "in adjacent regions" in southeastern Turkey and in 
northern Iraq were reviewed. 
 
 
¶2. Independent NTV reported that 3 liaison teams totalling 15 
members  -- five each in Mosul, Kirkuk, and at General 
Osman's Headquarters -- will serve in northern Iraq together 
with the U.S. units. 
 
 
¶3. Earlier, Deputy PM/FM Abdullah Gul announced that the GOT 
summit was chaired by PM Erdogan.  Participants included TGS 
Chief General Ozkok, Deputy PM Mehmet Ali Sahin, FM Gul, 
Defense Minister Gonul, MIT U/S Atasagun, and MFA U/S Ziyal. 
Gul stated that Turkish civilian and military officials have 
been in and continue to be in contact with their USG 
counterparts regarding the situation in Kirkuk and Mosul. 
"I've spoken to the Secretary of State (Powell) and the TGS 
Chief talked to his counterpart.  We reminded them of their 
guarantees.  They said that those assurances are still 
valid."  In response to a question, Gul stressed  that "the 
important thing for Turkey is not to allow any faits 
accompli."  Gul also announced that he postponed his trip to 
Damascus and ruled out speculation that the U.S. made a 
recommendation in that regard. 
PEARSON