This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
FAA ROME FOR JOYNER 
FAA BRUSSELS FOR AEU-1 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB AND EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR PGOV TU
SUBJECT: FOLLOW-UP ON FAA RECOMMENDATIONS ON AVIATION 
SAFETY OVERSIGHT 
 
REF: 300852Z_ FAA ROME 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) EconCouns met with Transportation Deputy U/S Kemal 
Albayrak July 16 to reiterate FAA concerns resulting from its 
May 21 consultations in Ankara, and to urge the GOT to revise 
its legislation to give the Directorate General for Civil 
Aviation the authority needed to operate in compliance with 
ICAO standards and recommended practices.  While welcoming 
the improvements the FAA team found, EconCouns highlighted 
concerns (reftel) regarding the turnover of DGCA personnel 
and Turkish Airlines replacement of key operations and safety 
personnel without consultation with DGCA.  He specifically 
noted that DGCA's inability under current legislation to hire 
and fire personnel without the Ministry's approval appeared 
to be the main cause of DGCA's personnel problems. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Albayrak emphasized the GOT's seriousness on air 
safety issues and its willingness to work with the FAA, 
including welcoming an FAA assessment of DGCA's safety 
oversight capability later this year.  While politely 
questioning the assertion that most of the DGCA staff have 
limited experience, Albayrak acknowledged most of the 
concerns raised by FAA.  He said the Ministry expects to 
address most if not all of these issues via new legislation, 
which he has drafted and which is now circulating within the 
government. 
 
 
 
 
PEARSON