This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261434Z Nov 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 002028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USAID/W FOR AFR/WA, MICHAEL KARBELING 
USAID/W FOR AFR/SD/ED, SARAH MOTEN 
USAID/W FOR AFR/SD/ED, CAROLYN COLEMAN 
USAID/W FOR AFR/SD/ED, SHARON NWANKWO 
 
 
LAGOS FOR ADMIN 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA-EDUCATION FOR DEVELOPMENT AND 
DEMOCRACY INITIATIVE (EDDI)-AMBASSADORS' GIRLS' 
SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM 
 
 
REF:(1)ABUJA 01439 DATED AUGUST 22, 2003, AND(2) ABUJA 
595 DATED APRIL 01, 2003 ON NIGERIA-EDUCATION FOR 
DEVELOPMENT AND DEMOCRACY INITIATIVE (EDDI); 
AMBASSADORS' GIRLS' SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM. 
 
 
¶1.  This is an action cable.  Please see paragraph 7. 
 
 
¶2.  As 2003 rapidly draws to closure, the USG Nigeria 
EDDI Committee is concerned that we have not yet heard 
from USAID/AFR/SD regarding a decision on the 
appropriate mechanism that would allow for the 
financing and oversight of the remaining two to three 
years of the current Ambassadors' Girls' Scholarship 
Program (AGSP).  We are herein repeating the text of 
our earlier cables, Abuja 595 dated April 01, 2003, 
and Abuja 01439 dated August 22, 2003, on this matter 
and await your decision and reply. 
 
 
¶3.  Summary: The USG EDDI Committee is concerned about 
the mechanisms that will be used to implement the 
Ambassadors' Girls' Scholarship Program, as presented 
in earlier cables and in debriefings with USAID/AFR/SD 
in Abuja in July 2003.  Post requests specific 
guidance on the disbursement and oversight mechanism 
for Girls Scholarships over the next two to three 
years, given the current contract is due to end in 
December 2003.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶4.  Background: The current Ambassadors' Girls' 
Scholarship Program in Nigeria provides scholarships 
and mentoring to 600 girls.  The scholarships assist 
the girls to complete one full cycle in the Nigerian 
education system (the three years of the Junior 
Secondary School, grades 7 through 9) or to attend 
special needs schools.  The mentoring component is 
implemented through local NGOs in each of the 
participating states, and provides for a mentor to 
visit each scholarship recipient at least once a term 
over a two-year period.  The NGOs are not "paid" for 
their services, but instead volunteering to act as 
facilitators for the mentors, with each mentor 
receiving about $100 to cover transportation costs for 
the series of visitations with their students. 
Scholarships are for an average annual amount of $900 
per student, disbursed in three yearly allotments of 
about $400, $250 and $250.  The first year's funds 
cover a number of items that are used for the duration 
of the scholarship period (desk, chair, uniforms, 
etc). Funding to date has covered Year 1 (October 
2002-July 2003) costs of this program.  Remaining 
funds are for Year 2 (October 2003-July 2004) and Year 
3 (October 2004-July 2005), with the program, in 
theory then, concluding in FY05. However, due to a 
delayed start-up in Kano State, this state is a year 
behind, necessitating support and oversight through 
FY06. 
 
 
¶5.  The current program began in August 2002, with a 
budget of $600,000.  About $540,000 is for the 
scholarship component, and about $60,000 facilitates 
the mentoring activity.  Administrative costs for 
implementing the program in Nigeria are provided from 
EDDI central funds, administered through the Science 
Applications International Corporation (SAIC) as the 
prime contractor.  Winrock International, a U.S.-based 
private, non-profit organization registered in 
Nigeria, is the sub-contractor under SAIC implementing 
the program in Nigeria.  While it appears that SAIC's 
contract with EDDI has been extended through September 
2004, Winrock's subcontract is currently only valid 
through December 2003, well before the promised 
scholarships are scheduled to end. 
 
 
¶6.  Pipeline Analysis:  As of September 2003, a total 
of $235,287 program funds are expected to have been 
committed.  The balance of $364,714 is earmarked for 
the remaining years of the current scholarship scheme, 
to complete the three-year Junior Secondary School 
cycle promised to each girl scholar participant.  At 
present, Winrock plans to open bank accounts for the 
current scholarship recipients, to ensure availability 
of funds for the remaining two to three years of their 
scholarships.  Given that the Winrock contract will 
end in December 2003, it is not clear how the 
remaining scholarships and mentors will continue to be 
funded. 
 
 
¶7.  Action Requested:  The USG EDDI Committee is 
unclear as to the mechanism that would allow for the 
financing and oversight of the remaining two to three 
years of the current scholarship program.  Will there 
be an extension of the current Winrock subcontract 
with SAIC, and of the SAIC contract itself, to allow 
disbursement and oversight of the scholarship funds 
over the next two to three years?  Or will there be a 
mechanism to transfer scholarship funds, and 
responsibility, to a new African Education Initiative 
(AEI) contractor?  In short, how will EDDI ensure that 
the current scholarship recipients actually receive 
the promised support for the remaining two to three 
years of their scholarships?  Failure to fund the 
remaining years would pose an extreme embarrassment to 
the USG in Nigeria.  The education of some 600 girls 
in Nigeria, who now depend on these scholarships, is 
at stake.  Please advise. 
 
 
MEECE