This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 07 ANKARA 001396 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EUR/PGI 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/05/2013 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TURKEY: ANTI TRAFFICKING-IN-PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
FOR 2003 
 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 22225 
 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
 
¶2. (U) As requested, Post's responses are keyed to questions 
in ref (A).  Embassy point of contact is Christina Boiler, 
Political section (telephone: 90-312-455-5555; fax: 
90-312-468-4775).  Boiler (rank: junior officer) spent 
approximately 150 hours in preparation of this report. 
Another political officer (rank FS-03) spent 30 hours and the 
Political Counselor (rank: FS-01) spent roughly 10 hours in 
preparation of this report. 
 
 
--------------- 
Embassy Comment 
--------------- 
 
 
¶3. (SBU/NF) Embassy recommends lifting Turkey from Tier III 
in the 2003 Trafficking-in-Persons (TIP) report.  GOT 
initiatives over the past 12 months have demonstrated 
commitment to lasting steps in the fight against TIP. 
Passage of an anti-TIP law in August 2002, creation of an 
inter-agency task force, and efforts to begin victim 
assistance measures highlight a few of the actions GOT has 
taken to prevent TIP, punish offenders, and aid victims. 
Turkey has signed and ratified all international protocols 
against trafficking and is working with the EU, SECI, and the 
OSCE to enhance cooperation in the region to combat TIP. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU/NF) Based upon existing information and reporting 
trips to affected regions, Post finds trafficking is not 
significant in scope, although it reportedly does occur. 
Turkey's liberal visa regime towards its former Soviet bloc 
neighbors obviates the need for criminal gangs to provide 
travel documents or facilitate entry.  While illegal 
prostitution by foreign women in Turkey is common, the 
majority of our contacts--GOT officials, police, businessmen, 
NGO and UN agency reps, and academics-- claim trafficked 
women are a small minority of those involved in illegal 
prostitution.  We continue to probe but have seen no evidence 
to substantiate private reports of transit from Middle 
Eastern countries through Turkey to Greece or Italy. 
 
 
---- 
Note 
---- 
 
 
¶5. (SBU/NF) Much of the information contained in this report 
is anecdotal evidence obtained by multiple sources 
(governmental and non-governmental) in multiple interviews; 
when we were able to obtain statistical facts or firm 
governmental data, we have included the sources with the 
information.  End note. 
 
 
---------- 
Begin text 
---------- 
 
 
¶6. (SBU/NF) OVERVIEW: 
 
 
¶A. (SBU/NF) Turkey appears to be a country of destination for 
a small number of women; transit may occur.  Reports from 
local officials in the Black Sea region indicate some women 
may be brought into Turkey through Trabzon's border and then 
sent to Antalya or other parts of Turkey.  No territory 
within the country is outside of GOT control.  There are no 
reports of forced labor or trafficking of men or children. 
There are no statistics- reliable or otherwise- to indicate 
the scope of the problem.  A 2002 IOM study of TIP focused 
primarily upon the root causes and conditions of the problem 
rather than the scope of the problem.  Sources of information 
include the following: newspaper articles and journalists; 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Ministry of the Interior and the 
Turkish National Police (TNP); the Ministry of Justice; the 
Ministry of Labor's Directorate on the Status and Problems of 
Women; academics; governors and subgovernors; the chief of 
mission of the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM); businessmen and hotel owners.  These sources are of 
varying reliability; some state officials indicated 
reluctance to discuss the issue. 
 
 
¶B. (SBU/NF) Most of the foreign women engaged in illegal 
prostitution or who work in the sex industry originate from 
the Black Sea Region (primarily Moldova, Georgia, and Ukraine 
but also including Romania, Azerbaijan, and Russia).  "Mafia" 
organizations from source countries are believed to 
facilitate forced prostitution or trafficking.  Their Turkish 
counterparts are believed to include former foreign 
prostitutes.  Embassy contacts stress Turkish traffickers are 
typically small, splintered groups, sometimes 2-3 
individuals, not large gangs.  These individuals are linked 
usually through friendship or kinship ties rather than 
business ties.  Uncorroborated reports of trafficked victims 
transiting through Turkey cite Israel, Italy, and Greece as 
destination countries. 
 
 
¶C. (SBU/NF) Anecdotal evidence indicates that the overall 
numbers of foreign prostitutes in Turkey has dropped over the 
past several years.  Embassy contacts cite improved economic 
conditions in the source countries and improved GOT 
engagement on the issue as reasons for the decline.  However, 
reports have increased of former foreign prostitutes who have 
gained Turkish citizenship acting as pimps or TIP organizers 
to bring unwitting girls into Turkey. 
 
 
¶D. (SBU/NF) A 2002 IOM trafficking study, as yet unpublished 
at the time of this report, focused on the causes and 
circumstances of trafficked victims into Turkey.  While GOT 
has not yet provided statistical data, general observations 
by the researchers found trafficking to be only a small part 
of illegal prostitution.  Economic conditions of source 
countries compelled women to come to Turkey in search of 
work.  While some of these women came initially as "suitcase 
traders," many of them willingly chose to engage in illegal 
prostitution.  By some accounts, a woman could make as much 
as 200 USD per night engaging in prostitution.  Following the 
passage of the anti-TIP legislation in August 2002, the GOT 
Records Department has begun to keep statistics on cases 
filed using this law; it is believed initial statistics will 
be available in late spring/early summer 2003.  Finally, a 
GOT inter-agency task force is currently drafting a National 
Action Plan and has tasked governors in 15 so-called high 
risk provinces to identify and locate potential shelters and 
to issue humanitarian visas and temporary residence permits 
to TIP victims.  Once implemented, these shelters and visa 
statistics will prove an invaluable resource in determining 
if Turkey is or is not a major trafficking destination. 
 
 
¶E. (SBU/NF)  The scope of trafficking in Turkey is not known. 
 Numerous interviews with governmental and non-governmental 
sources allow us to piece together how women may fall prey to 
the traffickers, but cannot provide a basis for an estimate 
as to how pervasive the problem may be.  Many women escaping 
poverty in the former Eastern bloc come to Turkey knowing 
that they will engage in prostitution.  Others come in 
response to misleading advertisements or enticements, for 
example to work as waitresses, models, dancers, or "bar 
girls" and are forced into prostitution by the groups who 
enticed them to come to Turkey initially.  While a few of 
these women have obtained work permits through tourism or 
labor agencies that turn out to be fronts for traffickers, 
many women enter Turkey through a valid tourist visa. 
Reports say that TIP victims' passports are usually 
confiscated upon entry by traffickers.  In cases where women 
come on a tourist visa to engage in prostitution, they may go 
into debt to trafficking groups to pay for passport fees, 
travel money, and clothes.  Officials tell us that women are 
forced into submission by frequent beatings and threats; 
often, trafficking gangs threaten violence to family members 
in source countries should victims prove uncooperative or 
testify against them.  Officials state women rarely complain 
against their captors because of potential ramifications at 
home.  TIP victims are closely chaperoned throughout the day 
for meals and pre-arranged outings to shops or hairdressers. 
On the other hand, large numbers of foreign women engaged in 
illegal prostitution appear to enjoy a large amount of 
freedom, registering for Turkish language classes, traveling, 
and obtaining cell phones. 
 
 
¶F. (U) Turkey is not a country of origin. 
 
 
¶G. (SBU/NF) Combating TIP became a GOT priority in 2002.  An 
inter-agency task force, chaired by the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs Deputy Director General for Illegal Migration, is 
comprised of officials from the Ministry of Interior 
(Department of Foreigners, Borders and Asylum; Department of 
Security; and Department of Organized Crime and Fraud), 
Ministry of Justice (Department of International Relations, 
Foreign Relations and Educational Affairs; Directorate of 
Criminal Records), Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labor and 
Social Security (General Directorate of the Status and 
Problems of Women; General Directorate of Child Protection 
and Social Services), Ministry of Health (Department of 
Treatment Services), Prime Ministry (Department of Human 
Rights and Social Aid and Cooperation Fund). 
 
 
¶H. (SBU/NF) Post has not been able to obtain direct evidence 
regarding the direct involvement of government or other law 
enforcement officials in trafficking.  However, there are 
credible reports of law enforcement officials receiving 
kickbacks either to smuggle aliens or to turn a blind eye to 
illegal foreign prostitution.  There are also indirect 
reports of government officials turned traffickers because of 
the potential earnings. 
 
 
¶I. (SBU/NF) Although the GOT has ample law enforcement 
resources to fight trafficking, it claims not to have 
adequate funding for shelters or rehabilitation for 
trafficking victims. However, the GOT is considering the 
conversion of state-owned unused social training centers to 
shelters and is negotiating with NGOs, most notably IOM, to 
provide rehabilitation services to victims. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU/NF) PREVENTION: 
 
 
¶A. (SBU) While government officials acknowledge that 
trafficking occurs, they argue that its scope is limited. 
They state that Turkey has a problem of foreign prostitution 
and illegal migration, contending Turkey's liberal visa 
regime for Balkan, Black Sea Littoral, and Caucasian states 
-- usually an automatic visa at the border for a nominal fee 
-- obviates the need for human smuggling gangs.  However, in 
response to international pressure, the GOT has begun 
meaningful steps to combat TIP both in Turkey and in the 
region. 
 
 
¶B. (U) Government agencies involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the Ministry 
of the Interior (which oversees the police, Jandarma 
(paramilitary rural police), and border guards); the Ministry 
of Labor; the Ministry of Justice; the Ministry of Health; 
and the Directorate on the Status and Problems of Women 
attached to the Ministry of Labor. 
 
 
¶C. (U) There have not been any formal, Turkey-wide 
anti-trafficking campaigns, to our knowledge.  Ad hoc, 
individual governors and police officials are reported to 
have engaged in public awareness campaigns against 
trafficking at the local level utilizing local NGOs.  The 
Directorate on the Problems and Status of Women held a panel 
in December 2002 on the issue of TIP.  The 200 plus attendees 
included NGO representatives, journalists, police chiefs, and 
MFA officials.  The Ministry of Interior plans to give the 
first training program to raise awareness of the TIP issue to 
75 officers from 15 provinces by summer 2003. 
 
 
¶D. (U) The GOT does not support other programs to prevent 
trafficking, to our knowledge.  However, the GOT is 
finalizing a National Action Plan, under which it aims to: 
- establish a national hotline for victims; 
- establish shelters; 
- centralize the issuance of work permits under one GOT body; 
- provide legal assistance to foreigners in positions of 
witnesses or victims during the continuations of court cases 
opened under Article 201(b); 
- provide more detailed training programs for officials on 
how to take victim statements and how to determine who is a 
victim; and, 
- increase the number of NGOs working on combating 
trafficking. 
 
 
¶E. (SBU) The GOT claims financial difficulties in funding 
prevention programs.  However, GOT is pursuing alternate 
funding opportunities, most notably NGO support, and 
expanding current training programs to GOT officials to 
include an anti-TIP component. 
¶F. (SBU/NF) Neither Post nor IOM is aware of any Turkish or 
foreign NGO actively engaged in fighting the trafficking of 
women or aiding victims.  However, GOT recently contacted IOM 
to prepare information on possible joint victim assistance 
programs.  The British Council, the cultural office of the 
British Embassy, organized a two-day conference on the issue 
of trafficking in June 2002.  Regional scholars, police 
officials, and NGOs participated. 
 
 
¶G. (SBU/NF) Turkey borders Georgia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, 
Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Bulgaria, as well as EU member Greece. 
 Istanbul has a large international airport and there are 
also international ports of entry by land, sea, and air 
through several other cities, including Ankara, Trabzon, 
Erzurum, Adana, and Sarp, on the Georgian border.  Although 
the government expends considerable law enforcement resource 
to monitor its borders, which are vast and remote, it is not 
always successful, and the smuggling of goods and humans 
occurs.  Contacts report, however, that the vast majority of 
trafficking victims and other foreign women who engage in 
prostitution enter Turkey legally, either by getting work 
permits at Turkish Embassies abroad or, more commonly, by 
obtaining one month visas at the border.  Since the collapse 
of the Soviet Union, Turkey has adopted a liberal visa regime 
with countries formerly in the Soviet Empire to encourage 
trade and tourism.  Women who are deported for prostitution 
come back repeatedly, according to police.  They alter their 
names slightly or receive a passport in an entirely different 
name with the help, according to Turkish police, of corrupt 
officials in source countries or organized criminals.  Poor 
centralization in Turkish border control or corruption may 
also aid reentry.  Only the passports of women testing 
positive for sexually transmitted diseases are scanned into a 
centralized computer system. 
 
 
¶H. (SBU/NF) The GOT started an inter-agency task force to 
combat TIP led by the MFA Deputy Director General for Illegal 
Migration.  (See number five; G for list of members of the 
task force).  This task force is finalizing a "National 
Action Plan" that will study all aspects of trafficking. 
Also, the Ministry of Interior has established an internal 
task force comprised of all relevant sections of the Ministry 
to coordinate its efforts to fight TIP. 
 
 
¶I. (U) Turkey plays an active role in the international 
community by regularly attending conferences hosted by SECI, 
USDOS, and IOM.  GOT further works with the United Nations, 
OSCE (Stability Pact and ODIHR), Interpol, and the European 
Union to combat trafficking.  Turkey has been especially 
active in the Trafficking Task Force within the framework of 
the Stability Pact/ODIHR. 
 
 
¶J. GOT has not yet provided copies of its National Action 
Plan in response to repeated Embassy requests. 
 
 
¶K. The MFA's Deputy Director General for Illegal Migration 
spearheads the GOT's anti-trafficking initiatives as head of 
the coordinating body for all agencies involved. 
 
 
¶8. (SBU/NF) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
 
¶A. (U) On August 3, 2002, the Turkish Parliament passed 
anti-trafficking legislation, Article 201(b) of the Turkish 
Penal Code. 
 
 
The text of the law is as follows: "Those who provide, 
kidnap, take or transfer from one place to another and house 
other individuals with the intention of making them work or 
serve by force, subject them to slavery or similar treatment, 
threaten, pressure, use force or coercion to persuade them to 
give up their bodily organs, use undue influence, secure 
their consent by deception or by using the desperation of 
such individuals shall be sentenced to five to ten years of 
heavy imprisonment and a heavy fine of not less than one 
billion liras. 
 
 
"If the actions that constitute a crime attempted with the 
intentions laid out in the first paragraph exist, the victim 
is assumed not to have given his/her consent. 
 
 
"If the children below the age of eighteen are provided, 
kidnapped, taken or transferred from one place to another or 
housed with the intentions specified in paragraph one, even 
when no intermediary actions relation to the crime are 
committed, the penalties foreseen in paragraph one shall 
still be applied to the perpetrator. 
 
 
"If the crimes listed in the paragraphs above are committed 
in an organized manner, the penalties foreseen for the 
perpetrators shall be doubled." 
 
 
¶B. (U) The penalty for traffickers is five to ten years of 
heavy imprisonment and a fine of not less than one billion 
Turkish Liras.  These penalties may be doubled if the crimes 
were committed in an organized manner. 
 
 
¶C. (U) According to the Turkish Penal Code Article 416, the 
penalty for rape and/or forced sexual assault is at least 
seven years.  Attorney contacts note, however, that rape is 
difficult to prove and suspects may receive lighter sentences 
for various reasons involved in the incident. 
 
 
¶D. (U) While final statistics regarding the implementation of 
the anti-trafficking legislation are expected in June 2003, 
GOT tells us that four pending cases have been brought 
against traffickers since August 2002.  At the time of this 
report, there were two public cases opened with trials 
ongoing.  The first of these cases was opened at the Criminal 
Court of Ordu on November 18, 2002, and the second was opened 
at the second Criminal Court of Van on October 10, 2002.  Two 
preliminary investigations have been also been performed. 
The public prosecutor in Ozalp/Van investigated 7 individuals 
and the prosecutor in Beykoz/Istanbul investigated five 
individuals for their activities associated with trafficking; 
the results are pending.  GOT did not provide further 
details.  At the time of this report, reportedly thirty-four 
persons have been apprehended across Turkey by local police 
for their involvement in TIP and sent to the court under 
Article 201(b).  Eight individuals were taken into custody in 
Antalya, three in Kocaeli, two in Ankara, five in Manisa, two 
in Nevsehir, two in Denizli, and ten in Istanbul. 
 
 
¶E. (SBU/NF) Generally, it is believed that organized crime 
groups from states formerly in the Soviet Empire are behind 
trafficking.  Contacts repeatedly stated that trafficking, 
where it exists, is in the hands of small operators.  Groups 
may be as small as four or five people who are connected, 
most often, through kinship or friendship.  Increasingly, 
former prostitutes who have gained Turkish citizenship are 
working as procurers and pimps and bring women on tourist 
visas.  Traffickers posing as tourist agencies or firms in 
source countries bring women to Turkey with official work 
permits.  Hotel owners are also believed to coerce women who 
work as prostitutes. 
 
 
¶F. (SBU/NF) Official sources tell us Turkey actively 
investigates cases of trafficking using special investigation 
techniques.  Police officials in Trabzon stated they used 
primarily undercover operations against traffickers.  The 
Ministry of Interior recently instructed governorships to 
issue humanitarian visas and temporary residence permits for 
victims to begin rehabilitation.  Our legal contacts hope 
these visas and residence permits will allow victims to serve 
as witnesses in investigations and trials of traffickers. 
Mitigated punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects may 
be granted unofficially; under Turkish law, there is no 
policy for plea-bargaining or other confessional treatment 
for victims of trafficking. 
 
 
¶G. (U) The GOT has begun implementing formal training 
programs on trafficking for police and judicial officials. 
The Ministry of Justice has given several training seminars 
to approximately 600 judges and prosecutors on the issue of 
combating trafficking-in-persons between the period of 
October 2002 and February 2003.  The Ministry of Interior 
recently developed a trafficking training program for 75 
police officials that will be completed by spring 2003.  As 
these training programs were internally developed and 
administered, Post is unaware of the content discussed or 
length of these seminars.  The GOT also provides special 
training to the TNP's Foreigner Section officials in areas 
such as visa fraud, passport forgery, and illegal entries. 
 
 
¶H. (SBU/NF) Turkey maintains security cooperation agreements, 
which deal with trafficking, with Belarus, Moldova, Ukraine, 
Georgia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Romania, and Russia.  As of 
late January 2003, the MFA told Post GOT had not been 
contacted by any countries regarding cases of trafficking. 
Turkey cooperates with the OSCE, EU, Interpol, Europol, and 
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation.  GOT officials have 
attended numerous international conferences on the issue of 
trafficking, organized by governmental and NGO bodies. 
 
 
¶I. (U) We have no information regarding the extradition of 
persons charged with trafficking from other countries or 
whether or not the government allows the extradition of its 
own nationals, if any, charged with such offenses. 
 
 
¶J. (SBU/NF) We have no direct evidence of official 
involvement in or tolerance of trafficking at an official 
level.  Contacts state there is some tolerance of foreign 
prostitution as long as it is kept within certain limits. 
Authorities may turn a blind eye in the belief prostitution 
brings an economic benefit.  Places where foreign women 
congregate may provide a cover for trafficked women.  One 
government source stated a current informant involved in 
trafficking was a former police officer who turned to 
trafficking crimes because of the money involved. 
 
 
¶K. (SBU/NF) We do not have any direct evidence of GOT 
involvement in trafficking. 
 
 
¶L. (U) Turkey has adopted the following conventions: 
 
 
-- ILO Convention 182 (Ratified early 2001) 
-- ILO Convention 29 and 105 on Forced or Compulsory Labor 
(ILO Convention 29 went into effect on January 27, 1998 and 
ILO Convention 105 on December 21, 1960) 
-- Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child 
Pornography (Ratified May 9, 2002) 
-- The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking-in-Persons, especially Women and Children, 
Supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime (Signed December 2000; Ratified January 31, 
2003 and put into force February 4, 2003) 
 
 
¶9. (SBU/NF) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
 
¶A. (SBU) The GOT intends to provide significant assistance to 
victims in the future.  In the past, those who have been 
trafficked into Turkey were generally detained and deported. 
 
 
The Ministry of Interior recently instructed all 
governorships to issue humanitarian visas and temporary 
residence permits for victims, to begin rehabilitation and 
treatment for the victim as well as to allow officials to 
begin investigation of traffickers and start legal action. 
 
 
The GOT, under the umbrella of its Trafficking-in-Persons 
task force, has plans to open TIP shelters in locations 
believed to be vulnerable to trafficking.  The Ministry of 
Interior ordered governors in 20 at risk cities to search the 
possibility to create shelters.  These governors were 
instructed to look at state-owned buildings that were not 
currently in use.  The GOT has also contacted IOM in Turkey 
to prepare a proposal for the operation of such shelters; 
however, no agreement has been reached.  At the time of this 
report, there were no shelters for trafficking victims. 
 
 
If a foreign woman is detained for prostitution, she is 
tested for sexually transmitted diseases (STD) before 
deportation.  According to the police chief in Trabzon, if a 
woman tests positive for a STD and requests assistance, she 
would receive medical help.  In 2002, very few women who were 
deported for prostitution from Trabzon and tested positive 
for STDs, requested and received medical care.  According to 
the Trabzon Police Chief, 740 foreign women were deported 
from Trabzon in 2002.  All were subject to medical tests and 
36 were infected with various diseases. 
 
 
¶B. (SBU) Turkey does not fund victim services, and there are 
no Turkish NGOs that provide such services.  Only IOM Turkey 
has worked with source country embassies to provide travel 
documents to women who have been detained for prostitution or 
escaped from traffickers. 
 
 
¶C. (SBU) While Turkey plans to take more victim assistance 
measures, victims of trafficking and foreign women detained 
for prostitution have been generally deported within two 
weeks of detention. 
 
 
¶D. (SBU) We have no evidence indicating that victims are 
encouraged to file civil lawsuits or seek legal action 
against traffickers.  The introduction of humanitarian visas 
and temporary work permits (see para A) may show victims more 
willing to seek legal action. 
 
 
¶E. (SBU) To our knowledge, the government does not provide 
protection for victims and witnesses. 
 
 
¶F. (SBU) The GOT has provided trafficking-in-persons training 
to judicial and police officials (see question 7 para G); 
however, course content has not been shared with post.  The 
second part of the question does not apply because Turkey is 
not a source country. 
 
 
¶G. (U) Not applicable.  Turkey is not a source country. 
 
 
¶H. (U) There are no Turkish NGOs working with trafficking 
victims.  To our knowledge, IOM Turkey is the only NGO that 
has provided assistance to trafficking victims (see para B). 
PEARSON