This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SECDEF FOR OUSD-P/ISP/TSPCP/CTR 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2013 
TAGS: TBIO MARR MASS AMED TU
SUBJECT: TURKS SEEKING NO-COST VACCINES, DELAY DECISION ON 
OUR OFFER 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 256701 
     ¶B. ANKARA 944 
     ¶C. ANKARA 1079 
     ¶D. SECSTATE 58805 
     ¶E. SECSTATE 61508 
     ¶F. ANKARA 1460 
 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert S. Deutsch. 
Reasons: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) MFA advised Economic Officer 3/25 that the GOT is 
waiting for no-cost vaccine offers through the NATO 
Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Center (EADRCC) 
before accepting or declining our offer to sell through FMS 
pre-event smallpox and anthrax vaccines. Through NATO EADRCC, 
Denmark has offered 10,000 smallpox vaccines for civilian 
use, sufficient for Turkey's civilian first responders, 
according to NATO Desk Officer Sahin Ozcan.  With regard to 
Turkey's military request for 20,000 doses, Ozcan said that 
he had forwarded our offer to the Turkish General Staff (TGS) 
and the Ministry of Defense (MOD) and is awaiting their 
response.  EconOff reminded Ozcan of our request for a VIG 
disclaimer letter in advance of Turkey's decision on smallpox 
vaccine to avoid processing delays. 
 
 
¶2. (C) With regard to anthrax vaccines, MFA advised that 
through NATO EADRCC, Canada offered 150,000 doses of 
antibiotics for anthrax exposure.  EconOff reminded Ozcan 
that our offer was for pre- (not post-) event exposure 
vaccines for 5,866 personnel and that time was of the 
essence.  Post will continue to follow and report. 
 
 
PEARSON