This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/NGA AND PRM, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PREF IZ JO
SUBJECT: IN ABSENCE OF IRAQI EMBASSY, IRAQIS IN JORDAN SEEK 
ASSISTANCE FROM US EMBASSY 
 
REF: CPA BAGHDAD 041713Z JUN 03 
 
¶1.  This is an action request; see para 4. 
 
¶2.  Embassy Amman's front gate receptionist reports that 10 
to 15 Iraqi nationals per day are approaching the embassy to 
seek assistance, primarily on Iraqi citizen service issues. 
The Iraqis explain that without a functioning Iraqi embassy 
in Amman, they have nowhere to turn on issues such as 
residency permits, permission to leave Jordan after having 
overstayed their legal residency, and commercial disputes. 
The Iraqis claim that the Iraqi embassy routinely intervened 
with the GOJ on their behalf to resolve these issues.  The 
Iraqis add that they are afraid to approach GOJ authorities 
on their own, as most are here illegally and fear that they 
will be jailed or deported if they make their presence known 
to the GOJ.  In one typical case, an Iraqi national reported 
to the receptionist that he has not been paid by his employer 
in six months and needs help in obtaining his back wages. 
This Iraqi reportedly wants to leave Jordan to return to Iraq 
but, without his wages, cannot afford either the fine for his 
illegal overstay or the costs of traveling to Iraq and 
reestablishing his life there.  (NOTE:  Fully half of the 
250,000 to 300,000 Iraqis resident in Jordan are believed to 
be here illegally.  As most illegal Iraqis are employed as 
casual laborers, they cannot afford to pay the fines required 
in order to leave the country legally.  Those who cannot 
afford to pay the fines are deported and "blacklisted," their 
names entered on a watch list and prevented from entering 
Jordan again. The GOJ reportedly has decided that fines will 
not be levied upon Iraqis returning to Iraq; we will seek 
confirmation and report septel.) 
 
¶3.  The front gate receptionist reports that a handful of 
Iraqis first began approaching the embassy for assistance in 
March but that the steady flow only began in the last few 
weeks.  Since May 14, the Iraqi embassy has been shuttered, 
with a sign beside the door announcing that the embassy is 
closed and no longer able to provide services to Iraqi 
citizens.  When conoff phoned the Iraqi embassy on June 10, 
an Iraqi diplomat answered the phone and said that the 
embassy was open only for humanitarian emergencies. 
 
¶4.  Action request:  Absent any specific instructions from 
the Department on this issue, we are informing Iraqi 
nationals that the US Embassy is unable to provide assistance 
to Iraqi nationals and suggesting that they turn to local 
NGOs that assist refugees and those living in refugee-like 
conditions.  We recommend that the Coalition Provisional 
Authority send the Iraqi MFA inspection team to Amman as soon 
as possible (ref), as -- in the absence of a functioning 
Iraqi Embassy -- the number of Iraqis seeking assistance at 
the US embassy is likely to grow. 
 
¶5.  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
GNEHM