This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 003751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2013 
TAGS: IR KNNP MNUC PARM IAEA
SUBJECT: GOT FULLY SUPPORTIVE OF USG APPROACH FOR JUNE 16 
IAEA BOARD OF GOVERNORS MEETING 
 
 
REF: SECSTATE 152375 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶2. (U) Action Request at paragraph 8. 
 
 
¶3. (C) SUMMARY. We delivered reftel demarche on June 9 to 
representatives of the Turkish MFA, who promised full support 
for the USG approach at the June 16 IAEA Board of Governors 
meeting. The MFA Director-General for International Security 
Affairs and Disarmament emphasized the strong concerns which 
Turkey, as a neighbor, shared about Iran's nuclear program. 
He queried whether there were other steps vis a vis suppliers 
or otherwise that the U.S. would be suggesting to address 
this problem. In addition, the MFA representatives requested 
further information on two subjects: the Iranian Kala 
Electric "Watch Factory," highlighted in the recent Los 
Alamos presentation to the May Nuclear Suppliers Group 
meeting, and a possible Pakistani role in Iran's nuclear 
program. END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶4. (C) DCM and Polmiloff met with Turan Morali 
(Director-General for International Security Affairs and 
Disarmament at the MFA) and Ibrahim Yagli (Disarmament 
Department Head at the MFA) on June 9 to deliver reftel 
demarche. DCM stressed USG concerns regarding Iran's nuclear 
activities and the need for a strong response by the IAEA 
Board of Governors to DG ElBaradei's report. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Morali, stating that the GOT shares USG concerns 
regarding Iran's nuclear activities, promised that the GOT 
would fully support the USG approach for the Board of 
Governors meeting. The GOT will deliver a strong national 
statement and demarche the "skeptical states" to support the 
USG approach. (NOTE: Polmiloff passed the full list of 
"skeptical states" to Yagli on June 10, noting that the USG 
does not have a particular preference as to which states the 
GOT should approach.) Morali also said that the GOI has not 
approached the GOT as part of its "public-relations" campaign. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Morali also queried us on our expectations for Iranian 
compliance and agreed the GOI was unlikely to provide 
complete cooperation. He mused about other steps the U.S. 
might suggest to deal with Iran's nuclear program, such as by 
increasing pressure on potential suppliers. 
 
 
¶7. (C) On a separate but related issue, Yagli asked whether 
the USG had any further information on the Iranian Kala 
Electric "Watch Factory," highlighted in the recent Los 
Alamos presentation to the May Nuclear Suppliers Group 
meeting. Morali also asked whether we had information on a 
Pakistani role in Iran's nuclear program (NOTE: PM Erdogan 
will be visiting Pakistan next week, which might be an 
appropriate point for Turkey to raise any concerns in this 
area.) 
¶8. (C) ACTION REQUEST: Request that Washington inform Embassy 
Ankara when additional information is ready to pass to the 
GOT on the Iranian Kala Electric "Watch Factory," and if 
there is any information which we can pass to the GOT on a 
Pakistani role in Iran's nuclear program. 
PEARSON