This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/08/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: ESTABLISHMENT SEETHES WHILE AK GOVERNMENT MAINTAINS MEASURED STANCE ON IRAQ INCIDENT 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 4240 
     ¶B. ANKARA 4193 
     ¶C. ANKARA 4242 
     ¶D. ANKARA 618 
     ¶E. ANKARA 2122 
     ¶F. ANKARA 2521 
     ¶G. ANKARA 1350 
     ¶H. ANKARA 4252 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reason:1.5(b)(d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Turkish press July 8 highlights the divide 
between the AK Government and military/Establishment over the 
recent arrest and release of Turkish troops by U.S. forces in 
Iraq.  While AK insists on a measured response, the 
military's political/press allies continue a confrontational 
public line with the USG and accuse AK of being submissive 
("teslimiyetci," a strong insult).  End summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
TGS "Reproaches," AK Stakes Out Low-Key Approach 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
¶2. (U) TGS Chief General Ozkok's statements to the press 
during his July 7 meeting with the Ambassador dominated the 
front pages of most dailies.  The mainstream mass daily 
"Sabah" highlighted "the Commander's Reproach" -- Ozkok's 
criticism that the U.S. action has prompted "the most serious 
crisis of confidence with the U.S. military" in the past 50 
plus years. Centrist-intellectual "Radikal" warned "this 
affair isn't over," asserting that if Turkey does not receive 
an "apology" from the U.S., "the TGS and the MFA (read: the 
diplomatic/bureaucratic corps) believe a visit by FonMin Gul 
to Washington would be meaningless."  "Radikal" further 
implies that the TGS will consider "additional measures" if 
the crisis deepens, including the closure of Turkish airspace 
to U.S. overflights; the expulsion of U.S. military attaches; 
the public announcement of U.S. contacts with the PKK; and 
unspecified sanctions against the KDP and PUK. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Meanwhile, the AK Government's statements to the press 
continue to be decidedly more measured.  F.M. Gul told 
reporters that he viewed the incident as an "isolated event" 
carried out at the initiative of "local" U.S. forces.  Gul 
said both sides are making efforts to prevent damage to 
bilateral relations.  Following a meeting of the Council of 
Ministers, Justice Minister/Government Spokesman Cicek 
criticized the political/Turkish State opposition for its 
"emotional" response, saying that the Government's 
responsibility is to work for a "realistic, responsible 
result."  Cicek added that there had been no U.S. request for 
Turkish forces to leave Iraq, and asserted that the reason 
for Turkey's military presence there "has still not been 
eliminated." 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ali Bayramoglu, columnist in the Islam-oriented "Yeni 
Safak" that is closely tied to Erdogan, asserted July 8 that 
the crisis may well adversely affect the "process of 
civilianization" underway in Turkey.  In parallel, July 7 and 
8 national security analyst Faruk Demir and AK deputy party 
chairman for foreign affairs Disli affirmed to us separately 
that the Turkish military is using the incident more for the 
domestic purpose of striking at AK.  Disli appealed for U.S. 
"moral support" for a government which, in the interests of 
maintaining the "essential strategic partnership" with the 
U.S., has exposed itself to heavy pressure from the 
Establishment, including charges that it is conceding 
(teslimiyetci) Turkish State interests and honor. 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
More Claims of U.S. Contacts With PKK/KADEK 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (U) Mainstream "Milliyet" asserted on its front page that 
U.S. officials have met three times in recent weeks with 
representatives of PKK/KADEK.  "Milliyet" also states that a 
report on the contacts was presented and confirmed during the 
end-of-June meeting of Turkey's powerful National Security 
Council (NSC).  The paper further asserts that the USG  has 
been using the PKK/KADEK as a source of intelligence on Iran, 
and plans to use the PKK/KADEK as part of an effort to change 
the Iranian regime.  Columnist Can Dundar, who has repeatedly 
been a conduit for anti-American stories (ref C), charged 
that instead of a strategic ally, the U.S. is quickly 
becoming the "Number One Threat" to Turkey. 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
"Inhumane" Treatment Alleged by Detainees 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Television and print media continue to give prominent 
coverage to interviews with the released detainees, many of 
whom claimed mistreatment or even torture at the hands of 
U.S. soldiers.  The detainees claimed that they were treated 
"just like al-Qaida members," and described being handcuffed 
and hooded, deprived of water, and beaten.  Papers also 
reported that U.S. forces seized large amounts of documents 
and equipment during the raid, much of which has not been 
returned.  Influential "Hurriyet" columnist Sedat Ergin, who 
is very close to the military, strongly criticized the 
treatment of Turkish detainees and urged F.M. Gul to cancel 
his planned trip to the United States. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
CHP: "Its Our Back Yard -- What Do You Expect?" 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Former Istanbul mayor/current M.P. Nurettin Sozen from 
CHP, the Establishmentarian party that leads the 
parliamentary opposition to P.M./AK leader Erdogan, offered 
to us privately that the Turkish military's recent activities 
reflect the policies it has pursued over the past decade in 
Iraq.  Sozen asserted that, indeed, Turkish military 
activities in Iraq have nothing to do with USG efforts to 
administer the country, and everything to do with "protecting 
Turkish national interests."  He acknowledged that the 
military may well have been up to "something" nefarious in N. 
Iraq, but asserted that the U.S. should have handled the 
affair "differently." Rather than bursting in on Turkish 
forces in a high-profile raid -- besmirching their "national 
honor" and generating front-page furor -- Sozen suggested 
that the USG would have been better served to discuss its 
concerns in diplomatic channels. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Parliament Speaker Urges Calm, "Common Sense" Approach 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) Ambassador Pearson paid a July 7 farewell call on 
Bulent Arinc, Speaker of the Turkish Grand National Assembly 
and an AK leader who was a key opponent of the Government's 
failed March 1 resolution that would have authorized U.S. 
troop deployments through Turkey.  Informing Arinc that the 
USG and GOT are establishing a joint committee to investigate 
the events, Ambassador also stated that the USG has good 
reason to be concerned about the activities of the 
apprehended Turkish soldiers.  Arinc thanked the Ambassador, 
observing that the importance of getting a clear picture and 
explanation of what happened before the Turkish people; 
otherwise, the "anti-Americanists" in the press and elsewhere 
would continue to try to foment a crisis.  Arinc noted that 
the opposition parties are attacking the AK Government for 
failing to take a hard-line stance.  He asserted that even 
stronger, and more serious, opposition to the AK Government's 
approach is emanating from "certain circles" -- meaning the 
Turkish military -- which he charged are motivated by an 
effort to see AK worn out and brought down. 
 
 
¶9. (U) In a statement to the press afterwards, Arinc observed 
that the investigation should identify whoever was 
responsible for whatever happened in Iraq.  He emphasized 
that the incident should not be "exploited" for political 
gain; nor, he admonished, should anyone "create the 
expectation" that the U.S. and Turkey "should become enemies; 
 common sense should prevail." 
PEARSON