This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001832 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/21/2008 
TAGS: IZ MOPS PARM TU
SUBJECT: GOT TERMINATES OPERATION NORTHERN WATCH 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch for 
reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
 
(C) On March 22, MFA Director General for the Americas Amb. 
Banguoglu called in DCM to deliver formal notification that 
the GOT has decided to terminate Operation Northern Watch. 
Banguoglu requested that all civilian and military personnel, 
forces and assets connected with the operation be redeployed 
in a reasonable period of time in close coordination with the 
Turkish General Staff.  Banguoglu stated that MFA had 
informed TGS of the content of the diplomatic note notifying 
us of the GOT's decision. 
 
 
Â¶2.  Begin text MFA note: 
 
 
2003/ALGY/111929 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassies of the United 
Kingdom and the United States of America and with reference 
to paragraph (j) of the Exchange of Letters between Turkey 
and the USA dated December 25, 1996 and the Ministry's Note 
of March 31, 1997, has the honor to inform the esteemed 
Embassies that the Government of Turkey has decided to 
terminate Operation Northern Watch as of March 21, 2003, upon 
the commencement of hostilities toward Iraq. 
 
 
It is kindly requested that all military and civilian forces 
and assets participating in Operation Northern Watch 
activities be duly redeployed out of Turkey in close 
coordination with the Turkish General Staff. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassies 
of the United Kingdom and the United States of America the 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
 
Ankara, March 21, 2003 
 
 
End text MFA note. 
PEARSON