This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 002335 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAIR KCRM US IZ KU
SUBJECT: KUWAITI AIRWAYS SEEKS ACCESS TO SEARCH FOR 
STOLEN SPARE PARTS 
 
¶1.  MFA U/S Khalid al-Jarallah called the Ambassador the 
afternoon of May 26.  Al-Jarallah explained that he had 
recently received a request from Kuwait Airways. 
According to al-Jarallah, Kuwait Airways believed that 
spare parts stolen from its warehouses after the 1990 
invasion of Kuwait had been housed at Baghdad 
International Airport.  They had asked him to seek 
permission from the Coalition Provisional Authority to 
send some personnel to Baghdad to search BIAP warehouses 
and record the serial numbers of any spare parts found 
there. 
 
¶2.  Al-Jarallah explained that Kuwait knows that 
mechanisms for the return of stolen goods have not yet 
been established and would in any event probably require 
international supervision.  However, Kuwait Airways was 
very anxious to know if any of its parts were at BIAP so 
that it could begin preparing a request for their 
eventual return.  Kuwait would greatly appreciate any 
help the US could provide in this manner. 
 
¶3.  Action Request: The return of stolen Kuwaiti property 
is mandated by several UNSC resolutions, including most 
recently UNSCR 1483.  Please advise how we should respond 
to this request.  JONES