This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/G/WHA(DDISQUALE);WHA/PDA(MBUCKLEY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO PREL HO IZ PA
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 3/20 
 
" Today moderate Tegucigalpa-based daily "El Heraldo" 
carried comments and reactions by representatives of 
Honduran political parties to the beginning of hostilities 
in Iraq.  The President of the Liberal Party in the Congress 
stated, "the Liberal Party opposes war between the US and 
IRAQ... the Honduran government should first get the 
consensus of its citizens before announcing any official 
position or support for anyone in this international 
conflict.  Not a single Honduran is in favor of war because 
poor countries are the ones who will suffer the 
consequences. We have to plead for peace in the world. 
El Heraldo also carried half-page interviews with the German 
and French Ambassadors to Honduras". 
 
" A member of the political committee of the "Partido 
Unificacin Democr tica" condemned the Honduran government 
position. "Hondurans should not take sides in this war. The 
UD Party cannot support a military conflict thatwhich does 
not involve the country's national interest. A war could 
impact unnecessarily on our economy." 
 
" The Resident Representative of the United Nations, Jeffrey 
Avina, was quoted as denying that the conflict between the 
U.S. and Iraq would have a negative impact in Honduras, 
saying that food aid won't suffer any changes.  "What is 
important is that the country conclude an agreement with the 
IMF in order to have support from the international 
community during the upcoming months". 
 
Palmer.