This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR OFAC FOR DAVID MILLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC MOPS PREL IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN-BASED COMPANY WORRIED ABOUT IRAQI SUBSIDIARY 
 
REF: A) AMMAN 2509 B) AMMAN 2374 
 
 SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Dr. Muwaffak Haddadin, Director General, Arab 
Company for Drug Industries and Medical Appliances (ACDIMA) 
met with Econoff June 29 to express concern regarding 
ACDIMA's Iraq-based subsidiary Arab Company for Antibiotics 
Industries (ACAI).  Haddadin said he was concerned about the 
security of the plant, which is 25 kilometers southeast of 
Baghdad, and the safety of its employees.  ACAI is a producer 
of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Haddadin said that, as of last week, the factory 
had yet to sustain any damage, either during the war itself 
or since the end of the war in April.  But he said that there 
was an increased presence of local militias and possible 
looters, threatening the day-to-day operation of the plant. 
Haddadin noted that the plant, which had been inspected by 
UNMOVIC in December 2002, contained a number of potentially 
dual-use components, including an autoclave and injection 
equipment.  That being the case, he suggested that it would 
be in American interests to find a way to protect the 
factory, possibly with "a tank or some military presence." 
Haddadin said he would send us a map with the location of the 
factory. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Haddadin also asked Econoff if the Embassy had 
received a response to his request for a license to unblock 
funds frozen pursuant to U.S. sanctions against Iraq (REF A). 
 Econoff responded in the negative, but told Haddadin Post 
would follow up. 
GNEHM