This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 SANAA 000398 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/02/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER AADP CASC YM EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING -- 2 MARCH 2003 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Deputy Chief Catherine J. Westley for Reasons 1 
.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meeting on March 2 to assess 
threat information and discuss contingency planning for a 
possible conflict with Iraq and other security-related 
matters.  Key offices and personnel represented at the 
meeting included: AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, 
ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN, RMO, FPD AND FBI.  End summary. 
 
------------------------- 
Current Threat Assessment 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  EAC discussed the current threat environment, 
concluding that nothing new had come up to change the threat 
assessment.  EAC discussed the arrest of senior al-Qaeda 
leader Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in Pakistan, noting that it 
could hinder attacks in Yemen if he provides information and 
if al-Qaeda lies low following the arrest.  The possibility 
of shooting attacks against motorists in light of recent 
attacks in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait was reiterated, with a 
reminder that Mission personnel should continue to exercise 
caution by varying times and routes, being unpredictable, and 
making maximum use of armored Embassy vehicles. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Warden Meeting Scheduled for March 3 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C)  EAC discussed the timeliness of the Warden meeting 
scheduled for March 3 as part of the Embassy's regular 
communication with the American community.  Other scheduled 
contingency consultations include:  DCM meetings with the 
Local Guard Force to discuss perimeter security (especially 
after the recent Karachi attack);  RSO contacts with all U.S. 
Fulbright students in country;  DCM meeting with spouses of 
U.S. employees;  RSO meeting with Amideast deputy director; 
and RSO follow-up at the Yemeni-American Language Institute. 
EAC members have heard increased questions from the larger 
expatriate community about what they should do in light of a 
possible war in Iraq and the drawdowns of British, Dutch and 
German Embassy staff. 
 
------------------------------ 
Securing International Schools 
------------------------------ 
 
4,  (C)  RSO briefed the EAC on efforts to secure 
international schools, including the Ambassador's 2/26 
meeting with the Ministry of Interior.  On the basis of 
Ambassador's proposal to the Minister of a security 
partnership -- in which the schools will take certain 
unilateral security steps and the ROYG will provide a static 
security presence at school sites during school hours plus 
mobile response teams around the clock -- follow-up is 
underway.  A group of representatives from the international 
schools and several embassies (including Embassy Sanaa RSO) 
met with Interior officials 2/27 to discuss what the schools 
must do and what the ROYG could provide in terms of extra 
protection.  The group is developing a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) for the ROYG that it hopes will help 
facilitate security assistance, including police escorts, 
concrete barriers and improved communications.  Embassy Sanaa 
is a leading participant in this effort. 
 
----------------------- 
Other Mission Drawdowns 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  EAC discussed drawdowns of other Embassies (notably 
Dutch, British and German) and international organizations in 
Yemen, including the UN.  RSO reported that the UN in Sanaa 
is preparing a report for New York to recommend that 
facilitation of the departure of more than 130 family members 
if necessary.  Several other small missions, including 
French, Japanese and Italian, are standing fast.  DCM 
reported that at the USG authorized departure posts in the 
region approximately 50% of dependents have left post. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Vaccinations and Disaster Response 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  EAC discussed the 2/23-25 smallpox immunization 
program, noting that only one person had fallen ill after the 
shot and that it could not be definitively traced to the 
vaccine.  The person is now healthy.  The RMO also discussed 
the future anthrax vaccinations and the possibility that the 
vaccines thought to be spoiled might be usable, pending the 
Department's analysis.  RMO briefed the EAC on disaster 
response discussions with ROYG officials, including the 
Minister of Health.  Yemeni authorities have the ability to 
analyze suspect powder and determine if it is/is not anthrax, 
but were generally pessimistic about their other CBW response 
abilities and requested assistance from the Embassy. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  RMO briefed EAC on the ongoing First Responder 
training, and noted upcoming training in bio-chemical 
response to include CBW escape mask training on March 10 with 
a visiting expert team. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Contingency Preparation:  "StandFast" and "MoveSafe" 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  DCM briefed the EAC on the guidelines for Embassy 
response to a possible Iraq contingency that would require a 
temporary closure and reduced or modified Embassy staffing. 
 
¶9.  (C)  A declaration of StandFast would entail immediate 
closure of the Embassy and curtailment of all but essential 
operations.  American staff performing essential functions 
would reside in the Embassy or the Alternate Command Center, 
while all other staff will remain in their residences.  DCM 
circulated a classified staff list designating each 
employee's StandFast location.  The Embassy would be closed 
to the public, with no vehicle traffic in or out except for 
essential operational travel (e.g., to/from ROYG ministries 
authorized by the Chief of Mission).  FSN staff performing 
essential functions would be admitted to the Embassy on the 
basis of an Access List updated daily by the RSO. 
 
¶10.  (U)  A declaration of MoveSafe would entail a less 
restrictive limitation on the movement of American personnel 
outside their residences or the Embassy compound.  Embassy 
operations may be shut down or curtailed to a limited degree 
if designated by the COM.  Travel would be allowed only in 
armored vehicles.  Non-essential American and FSN staff would 
be allowed access to the Embassy in accordance with the level 
of Embassy operations and the COM's assessment of security 
conditions. 
 
¶11.  (C)  DCM briefed the EAC on plans for daily situation 
reporting should hostilities occur between Iraq and coalition 
forces.  He asked that each section provide information to 
the Political/Economic section early for inclusion in a daily 
sitrep to be sent out via classified e-mail or cable by 
mid-afternoon. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Security Drills and Radio Checks 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U)  RSO held an intruder drill on February 27 that 
showed some deficiencies in staff knowledge on how to 
respond.  More intruder drills will be held in the immediate 
future.  RSO also conducted ongoing destruction drills with 
various sections.  All sections were reminded to minimize 
their burn time. 
 
¶13.  (U)  EAC noted the success of weekend radio notification 
by RSO and Post One of several peaceful demonstrations in 
Sanaa (2/28, 3/1, 3/2), which instructed personnel on the 
location of demonstrations and to avoid non-essential travel. 
 EAC also announced an intensified schedule of radio checks 
in the coming days.  EAC emphasized the importance of 
everyone carrying their radios at all times. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Demonstrations, Security Violations, EAP, Aggressive Driving 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶14.  (C)  EAC emphasized that everyone should report 
information gained on possible demonstrations or incidents 
related to demonstrations to the RSO.  DCM reminded staff to 
remain vigilant regarding security violations, especially 
during this busy time.  EAC members were reminded to read and 
comment on post's updated Emergency Action Plan. RSO asked 
EAC members to caution their staff to be more mindful of 
their driving habits, including avoiding unnecessary 
aggressive driving that could draw adverse attention from 
ROYG police and/or pedestrians. 
HULL