This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID - DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01 SITREP NO. 19 
 
REF: KUWAIT 1013 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 19 AS OF 1200 HOURS LOCAL, 0800 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME MARCH 28 2003. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP (all reported times are 
Kuwait Local, GMT plus three): 
 
----------------- 
Security/Military 
----------------- 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
 
0845 Received call from Camp Doha CSA Host Nation Liaison 
Manager, Mike Seals.  He called to report that a Branch 
Manager, Kelly Sanders, had been killed in a traffic 
accident at 0100 this morning.  Their HR representative, 
Laura Hooper will call the Embassy as soon as she arrives 
in her office, in approximately 45 minutes.  Mr. Seals 
left two phone numbers:  cell 984-4872, and office 468- 
¶5413.  Ops Center called ACS officer Kristina Midha and 
left a message at her home. 
 
0902 Received call from Amcit Debbie Harris.  She asked 
whether donations to the local blood banks would be 
useful to the soldiers and relief efforts.  She left a 
phone number, 561-5857 ext. 118.  Ops Center promised a 
call back. 
 
0904 Received call from Amcit Albert Price.  Mr. Price 
has just been terminated from his employment here and his 
former employer is refusing to pay for his airfare back 
to the US.  Mr. Price doesn't have enough money to buy 
the ticket himself.  Mr. Price's cell phone number is 
649-3944.  ACS will be notified when the CSA call is 
returned. 
 
0945 Ops Center called ACS Officer Kristina Midha on her 
cell phone to notify her of the above calls. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: n/a. 
 
JONES