This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001640 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OES/IHA (Allindor), OES/PCI, WHA/CAN (RUNNING) 
 
HHS FOR OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY, OFFICE OF 
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (STEIGER) 
 
CDC for Global Health Office (Cox) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO AMED CA
SUBJECT: WGSARS: Canada-wide Status Report June 10 
(Number 8) 
 
Ref. (A) Toronto 1714(Ontario SARS Update #39) 
     (B) Ottawa 1167 (Canada Wide Status Report #7) 
¶1. As of June 9, 2003, Health Canada has received 
reports of 424 probable or suspect cases of severe 
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Canada.  There 
have been 33 deaths in Canada.  Canadian officials 
maintain that to date, transmission has been limited to 
specific transmission settings such as households, 
hospitals and specific community settings.  Health 
Canada has provided the following figures, accurate as 
of 13:00 EDT June 9, 2003: 
¶2. The epicenter for SARS cases remains Toronto, 
Ontario with 225 probable (66 active) and 136 suspect 
(9 active) cases. See Toronto reporting for more 
detail. 
¶3. There are no active cases in the remainder of the 
country. 
¶4. British Columbia is reporting 4 probable (0 active) 
and 46 suspect (0 active) cases. Representing a net 
reduction of 8 suspect cases since the last Canada-wide 
update April 25th. 
¶5. Saskatchewan is reporting 1 suspect (0 active) case. 
No change since the Canada-wide update of April 25th. 
¶6. New Brunswick is reporting 2 suspect cases (0 
active).  No change since the Canada-wide update of 
April 25th. 
¶7. Alberta is reporting 6 suspect cases (0 active). No 
change since April 26th (representing a net increase of 
1 suspect case since our April 25th report). 
¶8. Prince Edward Island is reporting 4 suspect cases (0 
active).  No change since the Canada-wide update of 
April 25th. 
¶9. No reported cases of SARS in Quebec, Newfoundland, 
Nova Scotia, Quebec, Manitoba, Nunavut, Yukon or 
Northwest Territories. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Health Canada broadens case definition for SARS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10. On May 29, Health Canada announced that Canada is 
aligning its clinical description of symptoms and signs 
of SARS with that of the WHO. 
 
¶11. The previous definition of "severe progressive 
respiratory illness suggestive of atypical pneumonia or 
acute respiratory syndrome (RDS) with no known cause" 
has been replaced with: "radiographic evidence in 
infiltrates consistent with pneumonia or respiratory 
distress syndrome on chest x-ray with no known cause 
that can fully explain the illness." 
 
¶12. According to Health Canada, the revised case 
definition for probable and suspect cases will not make 
a difference in the way cases are treated nor how cases 
are identified.  Cases that are suspect or under 
investigation have always required appropriate 
treatment or attention. 
 
¶13. The WHO and provincial and territorial officials 
have been apprised of the new definition. 
 
Cellucci