This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 001350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NP/MNA FOR SHIRLEY HART 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/12/2013 
TAGS: PARM PREL PTER YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: YEMENI NATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION CHAIRMAN 
TO VISIT U.S. 
 
REF: CATO/GALLINI AND CATO/HART E-MAILS 
 
Classified By: Charges D'Affaires Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 ( 
b,d) 
 
¶1.  (U)   This is an action request -- see paragraph 7. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Dr. Moustafa Bahran, Chairman of the Yemeni National 
Atomic Energy Commission (NATEC), requests the Department's 
assistance in coordinating an important visit to the U.S. to 
discuss the physical security of radiological materials 
(PSRM).  In 2002, NATEC entered discussions with many member 
states of the IAEA on a proposed PSRM resolution to prevent 
the use of radioactive materials for terror.  The Republic of 
Yemen, in cooperation with the United States and the European 
Union, co-drafted and co-sponsored the final resolution -- 
IAEA GC/46/Res/13. 
 
¶3.  (U)  NATEC believes GC/46/Res/13 falls short of their 
expectations, and the international community can do more. 
Consequently, NATEC is campaigning to strengthen the existing 
PSRM resolutions during the 47th IAEA General Conference in 
September 2003.  NATEC intends to submit at text on PSRM, 
stressing the difficulties caused by the historical 
entanglement of PSRM and the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Materials (PPNM).  According to Bahran, if progress is to be 
made, PSRM must be a stand alone issue. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Chairman Bahran held discussions with his French 
counterparts in May and plans to visit England this summer on 
his way back from the U.S.  NATEC intends to use the support 
garnered from these consultations to move the General 
Conference towards consensus, 
securing the passage of their resolution. 
 
¶5.  (U)  For his consultations in the U.S., Bahran requests 
meetings with: 
 
 
a)  Department of State 
 
-- Bureau of Nonproliferation (specifically, Ronald Burrows 
in NP/SC) 
 
 
b)  Department of Energy 
 
-- Courtesy call with the Secretary of Energy 
 
-- Meeting with the Office of International Cooperation to 
discuss the peaceful use of atomic energy 
 
-- Meeting with NNSA's Office of International Protection and 
Cooperation to discuss strengthening international efforts on 
PSRM 
 
 
c)  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) 
 
-- Courtesy call with the Chairman of NRC 
 
-- Meeting with the Office of International Cooperation to 
discuss radiation protection 
 
 
¶6.  (S)  Dr. Bahran will be meeting with the Department of 
State's Undersecretary for Arms Control and Nonproliferation. 
 U/S Bolton visits Yemen June 16-17.  Dr. Bahran is scheduled 
to join the U/S for breakfast and will discuss the activities 
and objectives outlined above, as well as the importance of a 
regional initiative. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Action requested:  Post appreciates NP/MNA's 
assistance and requests their continued coordination and 
scheduling of meetings for Dr. Bahran.  Dr. Bahran would like 
to travel as soon as possible and has a multiple entry visa. 
However, his assistant does not.  Consequently, the earliest 
his delegation will be ready to depart is early July.  POC 
for questions concerning Dr. Bahran's visit is Pol/Econ 
Officer Willeah Cato.  She can be contacted via unclass and 
class e-mail: catowe@state.gov or catowe@state.sgov.gov, 
phone at (967) 1 303 - 155 x2155, or fax at (967) 1 303 - 
¶259.  A fax outlining NATEC's objectives and Bahran's 
proposed agenda during his visit to Washington has been 
forwarded to NP/MNA for Shirley Hart and NEA/ARP for Michael 
Miller. 
 
 
MISENHEIMER