This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 000698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/S 
BRUSSELS FOR EU 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR JFRAZER 
 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ZI
SUBJECT: The Honeymoon is Over -- CFU Dumped by the GOZ 
 
Ref: a) Harare 239; b) Cape Town 76; c) Harare 267 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The GOZ has been attempting to gain 
international support for its return to normalcy by 
showcasing its stage-managed "dialogue" with the Commercial 
Farmers' Union (CFU).  Now that the GOZ perceives no further 
advantage to playing up the supposed dialogue, the GOZ has 
unceremoniously dropped its photo-op accord with the 
farmers' group.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
GOZ Willing to Be Seen Romancing "The Enemy"... 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  In a move widely suspected to be a propaganda stunt in 
advance of recent decisions affecting renewed sanctions, the 
GOZ belatedly initiated a dialogue with the CFU in order to 
convince the Commonwealth and the international community 
that all is well in Zimbabwe (ref a).  Although Nigeria's 
Obasanjo and South Africa's Mbeki apparently accepted the 
purported dialogue at face-value (ref b), and cited this in 
support of removing Zimbabwe's suspension from the 
Commonwealth, the GOZ's one-sided position left no room for 
the CFU to cooperate while maintaining any degree of 
credibility with its remaining membership (ref c). 
 
-------------------------------------- 
...But Only While It Remains Compliant 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  The CFU responded on April 4 with a request that the GOZ 
"reconsider their draft [MOU] so as to incorporate the basic 
principles of commercial agriculture as listed below,1. 
Security of land tenure, 2. Law and Order, 3. Viability and 
Sustainability."  The CFU further denied any implied 
"foreign-based influence," and proffered a "Document of 
Principles" encompassing "a practical proposition that 
requires the State to focus its policies on maximising 
production and development."  With characteristic vitriol, 
Minister of Publicity Jonathon Moyo denounced the CFU as 
"unrepentant Rhodie farmers who are bent on becoming a law 
unto themselves."  He further stated that "the whole issue 
has been overtaken by events on the ground and it's a pity 
that the CFU has missed an opportunity for dialogue by 
abusing it..." 
 
¶4.  Moyo also blasted the CFU as one of the "lawless 
elements" instrumental in organizing the mass stayaway on 
March 18 and 19.  The irony of this accusation is that the 
CFU has steadfastly attempted to remain apolitical, 
sometimes to the point of inertia, and was one of the 
handful of businesses nationwide that did not shut down its 
offices during the stayaway, only an irrelevant fact to 
Moyo's vitriol. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  It is not surprising that the GOZ has so publicly 
denounced the CFU when no further benefit could be gained 
from the pretense at dialogue.  However, this gambit might 
be premature in that the dialogue had been presented to SADC 
as evidence of progress in reining in the current Zimbabwean 
economic and political crises.  If the SADC task force does 
manage to consult with all stakeholders during its visit in 
the next several weeks, a goal articulated by Mozambican 
Foreign Minister Leonardo Samao, the task force could get a 
much clearer indication of the reality on the ground than 
the GOZ intends.  Whether this translates to resolve within 
the SADC community to finally take a principled stand 
remains to be seen.  End comment. 
 
Sullivan