This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T COLOMBO 001348 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
FROM RSO FOR DS/ICI/PII AND DS/IP/NEA/SA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: X1 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: AL HASHIMI, MAHMUD SHAKIR MAHMUD - DPOB 11/17/1952 
(IRAQ) 
 
REF: A. A) DS/PII EMAIL DATED 7/29/03 
     ¶B. B) COLOMBO 00548 
     ¶C. C) COLOMBO 00582 
 
Classified By: RSO Alex Moore - Exempt from declassification, Reason: 1 
.6X5 
 
 ¶1. (S/NF) Ref A requested a summary of AmEmbassy Colombo's 
activities concerning Iraqi national Mahmud Shakir Mahmud AL 
HASHIMI.  RSO provides the following chronology: 
 
¶2. (S/NF) On March 25, 2003, at approximately 1445 hours, 
RSO/SD team, while on routine surveillance of DATT residence, 
reported that it observed Subject depart the Iraq Embassy and 
walk several hundred feet down Horton Place to a Chinese 
Medical Clinic that faces the DATT residential street which 
intersects Horton.  The Subject did not enter the clinic, but 
focused his attention on the street leading down to the DATT 
residence.  U.S. and Sri Lankan-provided security guards at 
the DATT residence were visible from the Chinese Clinic. 
After about five minutes, Subject left the clinic and 
continued walking approximately 500 meters around a corner 
and entered a business named AL Amana or ALAMANA.  Post 
passed this information to ORCA New Delhi and Sri Lankan 
Directorate of Internal Intelligence (DII).  Incident was 
reported in Ref B on April 3. 
 
¶3. (S/NF) On April 4, Ref C reported that ORCA New Delhi had 
identified Subject as Mahmud Shakir Mahmud AL HASHIMI, Iraqi 
passport number M0847934, owner of Al Amana Steel Buildings, 
Ltd.  Sri Lankan DII advised Al Hashimi maintained the U.S. 
address 5601 Seminary Road, Apt 2204N, Falls Church, VA 
¶22041.  Reftel also requested DS conduct record checks on 
Subject, results were negative. 
 
¶4. (S/NF) During this same period, Sri Lankan DII advised Al 
Amana (ALAMANA) Steel Buildings, located at No.6/3, Horton 
Place, Colombo 7, was a building construction and engineering 
company.  In addition to Al HASHIMI, Al Amana's Board of 
Directors was listed as: 
 
Chebel Joseph Basibes (Lebanese), PO Box 5643, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
M.W. Perera (Sri Lankan), No.134 Kohalwila Road, Gonawala, 
Kelaniya 
Jayantha Darmadasa (Sri Lankan), No.7, Longdon Terrace, 
Colombo 7 
 
¶5. (S/NF) On June 10, at approximately 1510 hours, RSO/SD 
observed AL HASHIMI walking in front of the U.S. Embassy.  He 
used a cell phone, waited for a period of time around the 
corner from the Embassy, then got into a white Toyota Carina 
(WP GH-4874) with two unidentified females. 
 
¶6. (S/NF) On July 23, ConOff reported that AL HASHIMI 
appeared at the visa window requesting a certified copy of 
his greencard (file number A43821387, DOB 11/17/1952). 
Subject explained that he was traveling to the U.S. on 
Saturday, July 26, and needed the certified copy as required 
by a letter from a Merrill Lynch office in Bahrain (Acct 
#1BY-03A64), signed by Mohamed Ahmed, Assistant Vice 
President.  ConOff requested RSO conduct record checks on 
Subject, and aside from the aforementioned SD reports, the 
results were negative.  On July 26, Subject returned to the 
Embassy and presented Iraqi passport number M0197107 issued 
08/07/2001 in Sri Lanka.  (This PPT number is different from 
that provided by ORCA New Delhi.)  Also presented was a 
Virginia Drivers License #558-59-5695, DOB 11/17/1952.  The 
driver's license listed an address of 6300 Stoneham Lane, 
McLean, VA 22101-2345.  Subject explained that was the 
address of his estranged wife, who is an AmCit. After 
considering the negative responses to record checks, ConOff 
provided Subject a certified copy of his greencard and he 
departed the Embassy.  Subject's photograph was emailed to 
DS/ICI/PII on July 30.  No further action has been taken. 
ENTWISTLE