This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 001888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2013 
TAGS: KNNP IR NL IAEA
SUBJECT: ACTING NP/DAS FITZPATRICK'S MEETING WITH THE DUTCH 
MFA ON IRAN 
 
REF: STATE 210913 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY POLITICAL COUNSELOR MARY DALY FOR REASONS 
1.5 (B AND D). 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary:  Acting NP/DAS Fitzpatrick and T Senior 
Advisor Wurmser met with Dutch MFA Security Policy Chief 
Maurits Jochems on July 21 to discuss next steps concerning 
Iran and the IAEA.  The Dutch are seized with the urgency of 
the Iranian nuclear issue.  They agreed to support 
encouraging IAEA DG ElBaradei to issue his full report on 
August 15.  The Dutch also agreed to raise the need for Iran 
to abandon its efforts to acquire a full fuel cycle with 
other EU Members before the September IAEA Board of Governors 
meeting, and to forestall support for only accepting an 
Iranian commitment to transparency and signing of an 
Additional Protocol.  The Dutch will approach NAM Board 
Members on their own to address the seriousness of the Iran 
nuclear issue.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Acting DAS for Nonproliferation Mark Fitzpatrick and T 
Senior Advisor David Wurmser reviewed the Iranian nuclear 
issue with MFA Security Policy Chief Maurits Jochems and MFA 
Nonproliferation Director Paul Wilke on July 21.  The Dutch 
share the U.S. sense of urgency about the Iranian nuclear 
program.  Jochems said the Dutch would support encouraging 
IAEA Director General ElBaradei to issue his full report on 
Iran on August 15 rather than at the end of the month. 
Jochems said the Dutch also supported delaying the EU's Trade 
Cooperation Agreement (TCA) with Iran until nonproliferation 
concerns have been resolved.  On tactics in the IAEA, he said 
the Dutch thought the Iranians should be presented with an 
clear demand to accede to an Additional Protocol by September. 
 
¶3. (C)  Wilke said that work needed to be done discussing an 
"acceptable end state" because many were arguing that Iranian 
commitment to an Additional Protocol would be enough.  The 
Dutch consider this a first step.  Acting DAS Fitzpatrick 
said the U.S. would appreciate the Netherlands' floating the 
idea that Iran needed to commit to abandoning its full fuel 
cycle program within the EU.  Jochems agreed that the 
Netherlands would pursue this with EU partners before the 
September BOG meeting.  Wilke urged the U.S. to help the 
Netherlands make the case by providing "hard facts to good 
partners" in the form of additional intelligence on the 
Iranian program. 
 
¶4. (C) Fitzpatrick noted U.S. efforts to discuss the Iranian 
nuclear issue with India and also NAM countries in Latin 
America and encouraged the Dutch to do so as well.  Jochems 
said the Dutch would instruct their missions in NAM capitals 
to raise the issue. 
 
¶5. (U) Acting DAS Fitzpatrick has cleared this cable. 
RUSSEL