This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007788

SIPDIS


E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/19/2004
TAGS: PREL PTER EFIN ETTC TU

SUBJECT: NEW TURKISH ACTION REQUEST AGAINST PKK/KADEK/KONGRA GEL IN IRAQ

REF: A. STATE 344619 B. 12/18/2003 KUNSTADTER-HENGEL/SILVERMAN E-MAIL

(U) Classified by Polcounselor John Kunstadter; reasons: 1.5 (b,d).

¶1. (C) Following our delivery of summary of ref (A) USG demarche to EU capitals on extending terrorist designation of KADEK/KONGRA GEL (septel), MFA DDG for counter-terrorism Asya passed over the a non-paper (para 2) which he said the Turkish General Staff had requested he forward. He asked that the USG take appropriate action.


¶2. (C) Text of Turkish non-paper:

Non-paper


The following information have been received with regard to
the links of KONGRA-GEL (PKK) elements with the authorities
of USA, KDP and PUK in Iraq:


--In accordance with the wishes of the USA authorities, Dr.
Mahmut Osman (a member of the Iraqi Interim Council) was
given the duty of "supervisor/overseer" of PCDK (Kurdistan
Democratic Solution Party; carrying out political activities
of KONGRA-GEL (PKK) in Iraq).


--Celal Talabani, after becoming the president of Iraqi
Interim Council, increased his support to the activities of
PCDK; KONGRA-GEL (PKK) members presently carry out their
activities in the PCDK office in Kirkuk; it is especially in
Kirkuk that there is an increase in the number of KONGRA-GEL
(PKK) supporters.


--A meeting was held between Murat Karayilan, one of the
leading figures of KONGRA-GEL (PKK), and PUK (KYB)
representatives in the Qandil mountain on 21 November 2003
whereby the following decisions were taken:


(a) Information exchange between KONGRA-GEL (PKK) and PUK
will be increased.


(b) PUK's border police will be supported by KONGRA-GEL (PKK).


(c) KONGRA-GEL (PKK) will be responsible for the security of
the border with Iran alongside Qandil mountain/Dolakoga and
Qasr.


--KONGRA-GEL (PKK) opened up an office inside the premises of
KDP in Mousul.  An attempt is underway to open up another
office in Baghdad and to that end:


(a) Faysal Dunlayici (alias Kani Yilmaz), one of the leading
figures of the terrorist organization, will go to Duhok,
Mousul, and Makhmur Camp in the following days, accompanied
by a couple of other terrorists.


(b) He will ask the KDP representatives in Mousul to provide
assistance in getting the permission of the USA authorities
for opening up an office in Baghdad.


Ankara, 18 December 2003


End text.


EDELMAN