This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 5, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Zebari Crisis - Sabah 
Zebari: Turkish Troops Should Not Come to Iraq - Milliyet 
General Jones says the US Will Solve the PKK issue - 
Milliyet 
Iraqi Governing Council Ready to Welcome Turkish Troops - 
Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Iraqi People Want No Muslim Troops in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Ankara Disturbed by Zebari's Remarks - Radikal 
Bush Requests $65 Billion Additional Budget for Iraq - 
Radikal 
Turkey to Supply Food to Iraqis During Ramadan - Zaman 
Rumsfeld: Countries Who Supply Troops will Sit at the Table 
- Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Zebari Remarks:  All papers give extensive coverage to 
remarks by Iraqi Foreign Minister Zebari.  Zebari, a 
representative of the KDP and Iraq's new foreign minister, 
said yesterday that Turkish troops should not be let into 
Iraq as peacekeepers, and that all of Iraq's neighbors 
should stay out in order not to create more problems for 
Iraqi stability.  Turkish PM Erdogan said that Zebari's 
remarks reflected his personal views, while Foreign Minister 
Gul stressed that Zebari should not forget that he is the 
foreign minister of all the Iraqi people, not only of the 
Kurds.  Gul urged the Iraqi FM to avoid statements that 
could cause confusion.  "Cumhuriyet" notes that a survey by 
the Iraqi Center for Strategic Research shows that only 3.8 
percent of the Iraqi people support the deployment of Muslim 
troops in Iraq. 
 
 
Turkish Troop Deployment:  "Zaman" reports that Turkish and 
US military delegations met yesterday to discuss a possible 
Turkish contribution to stabilization efforts in Iraq.  The 
delegations reportedly discussed details such as the number 
of troops, the location of the deployed unit, the command 
structure, and the transit route through the north.  The 
military delegation is expected to leave Turkey today. 
"Milliyet" reports that General Jones signaled that the 
Pentagon is taking the necessary steps to eliminate the 
PKK/KADEK in northern Iraq.  "Hurriyet" reports that Turkey 
is working on a humanitarian plan in order to win the 
support of the Iraqi people.  Within this framework, Turkey 
will arrange concerts of popular Turkish singers in Iraq 
and, during the holy month of Ramadan, will supply the Iraqi 
people with food for iftar. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"Get ready for a Kurdish state" 
Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in the mass appeal Posta (9/5): "In 
Iraq, only the Kurdish zone in the north has established the 
necessary elements for self-governance.  The Kurds have 
developed an infrastructure as well as education, health, 
and defense services, and they await Washington's nod and 
protection to declare sovereignty.  The possibility is 
growing that Washington will give a green light for Kurdish 
autonomy within a federation or confederation. .  Syria is 
not powerful enough to counter such a development.  Iran 
will not be willing to further strain its ties with the U.S. 
.  Turkey needs to develop a new and more realistic Kurdish 
policy in the face of changing global conditions. .  Instead 
of drawing new `red lines' for Northern Iraq, Turkey must 
adjust itself to the new conditions." 
 
 
"Things not spoken" 
Erdal Guven noted in the mass appeal Vatan (9/5): 
"Papadopoulos prefers that a minimum number of Turkish 
settlers remain in the Turkish Cypriot sector.  The Greek 
Cypriots believe that the Annan Plan enabled an estimated 
75,000 Turkish settlers to acquire citizenship in the new 
state in Cyprus.  The Greeks view this number as extremely 
high. .  Papadopoulos does not believe that the EU will 
provide a security umbrella for the island.  The 6,000 
Turkish troops allowed by the UN plan to remain in Cyprus is 
more than necessary, he believes. .  Papadopoulos is also 
unhappy with the political rights envisaged for the Turks in 
the Annan Plan. .  It seems that Papadopoulos will never 
reveal his true position in detail unless a real negotiator 
sits at the table with him.  He is comfortable as long as 
Denktas is in place." 
 
 
EDELMAN