This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 002455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR U/S BOLTON 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/03/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KU
SUBJECT: GOK (REALLY) READY TO SIGN ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. STATE 146573 B. KUWAIT 2297 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Richard H. Jones for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The GOK will be ready to sign an Article 98 
Agreement with the U.S. when U/S Bolton visits Kuwait this 
month, MinState for Foreign Affairs told the Ambassador 
during their June 4 meeting.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador met with Minister of State Shaykh Dr. 
Mohammed al-Sabah on June 4 to discuss Ref. A's follow-up to 
A/S Bloomfield's May 27 meeting with Dr. Mohammed and Kuwaiti 
Ambassador Salim Al Sabah's May 29 meeting with U/S Bolton 
(Ref B).  Although the GOK had raised additional concerns 
over the text of Ref A's counter-proposal during a meeting 
between the DCM and the MFA Legal Department Director the 
previous day, Shaykh Dr. Mohammed assured the Ambassador that 
all such issues had been resolved during his morning briefing 
with the Legal Department and the GOK was ready to accept 
U.S. counter-proposal as presented. 
 
¶3. (C) Dr. Mohammed said the GOK will be ready to sign the 
agreement during U/S Bolton's planned visit to Kuwait this 
month, and confirmed that the agreement could enter into 
effect through the exchange of Diplomatic Notes.  Embassy 
will obtain and forward a GOK-provided Arabic translation of 
the agreement for Department conformance as soon as possible. 
JONES