This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 002235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, WHA/PDA 
WHITE HOUSE PASS NSC/WEUROPE; NSC/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KPAO KMDR OPRC CA OIIP
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION: MIDDLE EAST; IRAQ; 
          AFGHANISTAN; TERRORISM 
 
MIDDLE EAST 
¶1.   "Stumbling block on road to peace" 
The liberal Toronto Star opined (8/5): "...Bush has 
been pressing Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to 
divert the path of the barrier so it consumes less West 
Bank territory. But Sharon last week dismissed Bush's 
request to dismantle or move the fence.... Israel has 
every right to build a security fence, or wall, along 
its borders. Many countries have such barriers. The 
U.S. has built high-tech fences, complete with barbed 
wire, along much of its border with Mexico. Washington 
even flirted with the idea of a similar security fence 
along parts of its border with Canada after the World 
Trade Center terrorist attack. But it is a mistake to 
build the fence on land that might become part of a 
separate Palestinian state, or be controlled by 
Palestinians, if the current Mideast peace process is 
successful. Sharon 
knows the fence won't stop terrorists determined to 
attack Israel.... However, Bush must continue to 
pressure Sharon to dismantle the fence. At the least, 
the U.S. president must demand it follow the Green 
Line. Sharon needs to be told firmly that he cannot 
indirectly annex parts of the West Bank. To do so will 
damage this oh-so-fragile peace process." 
 
IRAQ 
¶2.   "U.S. wants Saddam, but dead - not alive" 
Contributing foreign editor Eric Margolis wrote in the 
conservative tabloid Ottawa Sun (8/3): "...Chances are 
Saddam, like his sons, will be killed in a Bonnie and 
Clyde-style shootout. He is unlikely to be captured, 
unless incapacitated. The Bush administration will be 
delighted not to put Saddam on public trial. Dead 
dictators tell no tales.... Saddam should be handed 
over by the U.S. to the UN War Crimes Tribunal in The 
Hague that is trying Serbia's Slobodan Milosevic and 
other accused Balkan war criminals. After all, it was 
Washington that engineered Milosevic's delivery to The 
Hague, an act for which the U.S. deserves high praise. 
What applies to Milosevic applies equally to Saddam 
Hussein. In fact, it would be better for the Iraqi 
leader to stand trial at the newly constituted 
International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague. But the 
Bush administration, in one of its most 
shameful acts, has refused to join this tribunal or co- 
operate with it. Should Saddam be gunned down, like his 
two sons, there will be glee among many Americans and 
rejoicing in the White House. But Saddam Hussein is not 
John Dillinger or a prize elk. However odious, he was 
the leader of a sovereign nation and a government 
recognized by the U.S. Killing foreign 
heads of state violates international law and the 
directives made by three American presidents.... 
America, the world's greatest democracy, has no 
business murdering foreign leaders. Such behaviour is 
criminal, immoral, undemocratic and reeks of the law of 
the jungle. Past U.S. attempts to murder foreign 
leaders have proved self-defeating.... George Bush may 
yearn to drape the body of Saddam over his Jeep and 
show it off to the folks around Crawford, Texas, but he 
should be forcefully reminded that the president 
represents the laws of the land. Bad enough the White 
House waged a totally unnecessary, unprovoked, 
undeclared war on Iraq based on spurious charges. This 
egregious offence should not be compounded by cold- 
blooded murder, no matter how odious the intended 
victim." 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
¶3.   "The Afghan trenches" 
Editorialist Serge Truffaut wrote in the liberal Le 
Devoir (8/4): "The UN report on Afghanistan says the 
present climate of danger is seriously threatening the 
peace process.... [Afghanistan] is a general state of 
chaos accompanied by an increase in violence.... The 
vast and essential demining program has been suspended 
in more than ten provinces.... The burka is now almost 
as visible as in the days of the Taliban. Women in fear 
of men remain basically prisoners in their own 
homes.... This general degradation is due to two 
political factors: The first is that the foreign 
countries involves, mainly the U.S. and Europe hesitate 
to order additional deployment of troops.... The 
other...is Iraq. Several American analysts have stated 
that the preparation of the war in Iraq guaranteed that 
the Afghan file would be relegated to the background by 
the Bush administration." 
 
TERRORISM 
¶4.   "Bush's Cassandras" 
Editorialist Serge Truffaut wrote in the liberal Le 
Devoir (8/5): "President Bush does not want to 
declassify that famous chapter the senators wrote on 
Saudi Arabia despite the demands of these senators and 
the Saudi Government itself. According to information 
revealed by elected officials who worked on the report, 
Saudi agents informed their government about the 
intentions of the perpetrators of September 11.  If the 
Saudi government is so intent on having the chapter 
concerning itself made public, why is Bush refusing? Is 
it to protect the CIA and the FBI. Is it not to hurt 
some Saudi sensitivities.... While we wait for an end 
to this confusion...we can only observe that the war 
against Iraq has indeed slowed down the war on 
terrorism on its most delicate front: the reform of the 
intelligence services." 
 
¶5.   "U.S. must take hard look at Saudi alliance" 
The conservative Montreal Gazette opined (8/6): "The 
American reluctance to confront its relationship with 
this quaintly pathological kingdom is perhaps 
understandable. Through the vicissitudes of Mideast 
power politics, the Saudis have been one of the few 
constants, a reliable if eccentric ally and a 
dependable source of crude oil. But the time has come 
for the U.S. to start at least questioning its links to 
the world's most medieval monarchy. Releasing those 28 
pages would make a good start." 
 
CELLUCCI