This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221907Z Dec 03C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 008405 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ JO
SUBJECT: SUNNI ROYALIST IRAQI DISCUSSES SUNNI SENTIMENT 
 
 
Classified By: DCM David Hale for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) An Iraqi Sunni contact from the al-Darraji tribe in 
Samarra and advisor to the Royal Democratic Coalition party 
discussed with PolOff his views on Iraq and the Samarra 
region.  Echoing a common theme, he claimed that most Iraqi 
Sunnis believe that the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) 
is marginalizing them and do not feel properly represented by 
the Sunni members on the U.S.-appointed Governing Council. 
End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
SADDAM'S ARREST PROMPTS MIXED FEELINGS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) PolOff met December 16 with Salah al-Samirrai, a 
Jordan-based Iraqi from the Samarra area and advisor to the 
Royal Democratic Coalition political party, who travels often 
between Amman and Baghdad.  Samarra is one of the 
"ambush-prone" Iraqi cities of the "Sunni Triangle." 
Al-Samirrai, although happy to see Saddam captured,  was also 
saddened by what he termed "a weak moment for Iraqis." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
CLASHES IN SAMARRA "SOUR" TRIBAL LEADERS ON U.S. FORCES 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3. (C) According to al-Samirrai, a recent clash between 
insurgents in Samarra resulted in the death of approximately 
twenty people.  Currently, Samirrai confirmed, tribal leaders 
in Samarra are upset with coalition forces.  He suggested the 
U.S. military apologize to them.  Sheikhs he spoke to warned 
that from now on they would deal "differently" with U.S. 
coalition forces. 
 
------------------ 
SUNNI RESTLESSNESS 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (C) Al-Samirrai said CPA-appointed governors are 
unrepresentative and seen as "out-of-touch", unresponsive, 
inaccessible, and incommunicative by average Iraqis. 
Al-Samirrai suggested the tribal leaders/sheikhs themselves 
could select representatives from each governorate to 
represent the "people".  Al-Samirrai added that some Iraqis 
believe the U.S. is biased against them because Saddam 
Hussein is a Sunni.  He said many Sunnis dismiss their 
representatives on the Governing Council, labeling Sunni 
Naseer al-Chaderchi and Adnan Pachachi as "Turks" and not 
real Arabs, and Samir Mahmoud, a Sunni who has lived for 
years in London, an "outsider." 
 
¶5.  Al-Samirrai remarked that many Sunnis he has talked to 
feel marginalized and threatened by what they term as a 
"pro-Shi'a" CPA in Baghdad.  This alleged bias, many claim, 
has intensified the Sunni-Shi'a distinctions more than Saddam 
ever did.   Many Sunni contacts stressed the CPA should 
reinforce the message that it is not against them and that 
they will be equal partners in the rebuilding of Iraq. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. Al-Samirrai's views reflect his royalist affiliation and 
Sunni-Shi'a distrust in Iraq.  His allegation that the CPA is 
biased against Sunni Iraqis would likely be contested by many 
outside the Sunni fold.  Still, his claims of growing 
discontent among tribal leaders in the Samarra region are 
worth noting. 
 
¶7. (C) BIO: 
 
Name: Salah Al-Samirrai 
DOB: 1965 
Civil Status: Married, one son and six daughters 
Tribal Affiliation: al-Darraji tribe 
Religion: Sunni 
Education: Completed a two-year Electrical engineering degree 
Language Capacity: Native Arabic only 
 
¶8. (U) CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified website at 
http://www.state.sgov/p/nea/amman/ 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM