This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - 09 FEBRUARY 2003 
 
REF: SANAA 00255 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affairs Alan G. Misenheimer, for reasons 1.5 (b 
) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin summary: The Charge convened an EAC meeting 
on February 9 to assess recent threat information and discuss 
security-related issues, including alleged terrorist food 
poisoning, enhanced personal security awareness and obstacles 
to Chem/Bio training.  Also mentioned was EAP readiness and 
the need to prepare for a future conflict in Iraq.  Key 
offices and personnel represented at the meeting included: 
CHG, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN, 
RMO, FPD AND FBI.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  The Charge opened the meeting with a briefing on 
the latest Department worldwide advisory, highlighting the 
possibility for further al-Qaeda attacks in the Arabian Gulf. 
 Specifically mentioned was the possibility of poisoned food 
supplies.  AdminOff will investigate the food procurement 
process and suggested tasking the Regional Security Office's 
(RSO) Surveillance Detection team to observe Post food 
deliveries.  FPD Chief volunteered to work with the RSO to 
conduct criminal investigations of potential food supply 
poisoning. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ORCA Chief described a developing rift between 
two very high-ranking al-Qaeda operatives, explaining that 
one individual continues to seek long range planning of 
attacks against economic targets, while the other wants to 
execute small, multiple, random acts of violence.  ORCA Chief 
advised of the need for continued personal security 
vigilance, especially if the latter strategy proves to become 
al-Qaeda's favored modus operandi.  The Consul added that she 
will emphasize the need for unofficial Americans in Yemen to 
employ the same personal security measures currently 
practiced by Embassy officials during the upcoming February 
10 warden meeting. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  The Charge stated that a Department Chem/Bio 
training team had been scheduled to arrive Post on February 
10, but the visit was postponed because escape masks to be 
used for training are being held up at the Republic of Yemen 
Government (ROYG) Customs warehouse (see reftel).  The Charge 
assigned the ORCA Chief to relay to the Political Security 
Organization Chief that holding these masks is an extremely 
serious act that could have grave repercussions for future 
U.S. - ROYG intelligence cooperation. 
 
¶5. (S/NF)  RSO notified the EAC that Emergency Action Plan 
(EAP) chapters are ready for dissemination to appropriate 
offices for input and clearance.  February 24 is the target 
date for EAP completion. 
 
¶6. (S/NF)  The Charge concluded the meeting by alerting EAC 
members to prepare for a post-Eid holiday EAC meeting to 
discuss Embassy contingency measures in the event of U.S. 
military action in Iraq. 
MISENHEIMER