This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR OES, ELIZABETH TIRPAK, AND EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT SENV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY APPROVES RESEARCH VESSEL "KNORR" REQUEST TO 
CONDUCT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 
 
 
REF: SECSTATE 189716 
 
 
¶1.  This cable is in reference to State file 200Z-097, R/V 
Knorr, April 15 - May 16, 2003. 
 
 
¶2.  The Foreign Ministry has granted permission for the 
research vessel 'Knorr' to conduct scientific research in the 
Western Black Sea from April 15 - May 15. The approval came 
in the form of the following diplomatic note. 
 
 
Begin Text: 
 
 
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the Ministry's Note dated 
February 27, 2003, No: 2003/DHGY/78790 and the Embassy's 
Notes dated February 18, 2003, No: 272, and dated October 16, 
2002, No: 1140 has the honour to inform the Embassy that the 
research vessel "Knorr" has been granted permission for 
conducting marine scientific research in Western Black Sea, 
in the areas details of which are given by the abovementioned 
Note No: 1140, between 15 April - 15 May 2003, provided that 
following conditions are fulfilled: 
 
 
    - All measures should be taken for preventing any 
negative effect to the normal flow of the maritime traffic 
and for ensuring safety of life, property, navigation and 
environment in the research areas.  To this end, the 
necessary warning should be made in due time. 
 
 
    - Coordination with Samsun and Istanbul Regional 
Directorates of the Undersecretariat for Maritime Affairs 
should be established and kept in all phases of the research. 
 
 
    - Two scientists from Turkish Petroleum Corporation 
(TPAO) and a scientist from the Department of the Navigation, 
Hydrography and Oceangraphy of Turkish Naval Forces Command 
should take part in the research and the raw data of the 
research should be given to the latter by the end of the 
cruise. 
 
 
    - The coordinates (41 Degrees 13 Minutes North, 029 
Degrees 09 Minutes East) of the first station which is common 
in the two legs of the cruise should be changed as 4l Degrees 
18 Minutes North, 029 Degrees 09 Minutes East due to its 
geographical proximity to the northern entrance of the Strait 
of Istanbul. 
 
 
    -  In case underwater cultural assets are found during 
the research, without any intervention, the Ministry of 
Culture should be promptly informed about the fact and also 
the documents regarding this finding should be submitted to 
the said Ministry. 
 
 
    -  Two copies of the preliminary cruise report should be 
submitted to the Ministry within a month after the end of the 
cruise and the final report within three months. 
 
 
    -  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of 
Turkey avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the 
Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its 
highest consideration. 
 
 
 
 
End Text. 
 
 
PEARSON