This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS ASEC PTER IZ VM
SUBJECT:  "MASS" PEACE RALLIES IN HANOI 
 
REF:  A. HANOI  409    B.  HANOI 396    C. HCMC 157 
 
¶1.  (U)  Similar to the pro-peace meeting they organized on 
February 18 in Hanoi (ref b), the Vietnam Fatherland Front 
(VFF), the Vietnam Peace Committee, the Committee for Asian- 
African-Latin American Solidarity and Cooperation, and the 
Vietnam-Iraq Friendship Society jointly sponsored another 
anti-war protest in Hanoi on March 15.  According to 
official press accounts, between 2,000-5,000 people from all 
walks of life attended, including busloads of schoolchildren 
as well as representatives of religious groups, workers, 
intellectuals, etc.  The protest was notable mostly for its 
location: outdoors in the Indira Gandhi Park adjacent to the 
downtown Hoan Kiem Lake. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Organizers formally referred to this occasion a 
"meeting" rather than a rally or demonstration.  In true 
Communist style, even this outdoor gathering "passed a 
resolution" opposing military action by the U.S., the UK, 
and other "warlike forces" and calling for "political 
measures" in order to avoid "additional hardships" for the 
Iraqi people.  VFF chief Pham The Duyet, a former CPV 
Politburo member, called for the UN and all "responsible 
governments" to do everything in their power in accordance 
with international law, as well as in the "common interests 
of peace-loving peoples," to protect the independence and 
sovereignty of all nations, including Iraq. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Separately, the Vietnam Women's Union, another mass 
organization under the VFF, held a rally also on March 15 
similarly to express its hope for peace, its opposition to 
war, and its "complete sympathy" with the women and people 
of Iraq.  The representatives called on all parties to 
"prevent war in time" and to find "fair political measures" 
for the Iraqi problem consistent with the UN Charter and 
international law. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Comment:  These mass gatherings may lack the 
spontaneity or non-official nature of anti-war protests 
elsewhere in the world (which have been reported extensively 
in the state media here), but do reflect a carefully 
cultivated popular suspicion of US motives and a deep 
aversion to US-led military action against Iraq.  More 
official and semi-official protests and rallies can be 
expected if military action against Iraq begins (with or 
without UN Security Council approval).  The GVN and CPV may 
even go so far as to orchestrate protests at or near US 
diplomatic facilities.  Nonetheless, Embassy continues to 
believe that GVN public security forces will ensure that any 
protests do not threaten our facilities or personnel. 
PORTER