This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 002007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE 
 
FOR ECA/PE/V/P - MARGERY BENSON; ECA/PE/V/G/W - EWILKES- 
SCOTT; INFO WHA/PDA - WWANLUND 
MONTREAL FOR PAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL CA
SUBJECT: FY 2003 IV MRP "MULTILATERAL DIPLOMACY" EVALUATION 
FOR JEAN-PHILIPPE RACICOT 
 
¶A.   DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY: 21-day multi-regional program 
on "U.S. Perspectives on Multilateral Diplomacy Issues," 
participant Jean-Philippe Racicot, Analyst (U.S.), Western 
Hemisphere Intelligence Assessment Secretariat, Privy 
Council Office, Canada. 
 
¶B.   DATE, FISCAL YEAR AND QUARTER: May 8-29, 2003; FY-03, 
Quarter three 
 
¶C.   JUSTIFICATION AND OBJECTIVE: At the time he was 
nominated, Mr. Racicot was one of few international 
observers in Quebec who could claim a solid background in 
defense matters, with expertise ranging from NATO expansion 
issues to North American defense and Iraq's weapons of mass 
destruction.  An academic frequently featured on news 
programs, Mr. Racicot gains followers by being able to 
tailor his explanations to his audiences. 
 
Having recently made a transition from academia into the 
federal government, Mr. Racicot will continue to inform 
Canadian policymaking through his keen analysis and 
exploration of international issues. 
 
¶D.   MPP THEME: National security; economic prosperity; 
    global issues 
 
¶E.   RESULT/IMPACT:  A U.S. watcher for many years, Mr. 
Racicot had little direct experience with Americans.  For 
him, this international visitor program delivered both 
insightful discussion of U.S. policy and society and 
enlightening first-hand contact with Americans, from neo- 
cons to ultra liberals, from urban elites to ranchers.  In 
addition, he gained from interaction with the diverse group 
of participants in the MRP. 
 
An academic by training, Mr. Racicot appreciated the well- 
prepared briefings the group received from the Council on 
Foreign Relations (he learned more there in an hour than in 
a day of other briefings), the Near East Institute 
(brilliant speaker), and the Georgetown professor who 
offered a condensed course in federalism and civics.  Beyond 
the briefings, Mr. Racicot particularly enjoyed encounters 
with Americans, the hallmark of the IV program, from the 
stimulating discussants at Exxon-Mobil and the Oil and Gas 
Journal to Bubba, the world-traveled Brahman cattle rancher; 
gun shop owners; and the retired viola player who offered 
him home hospitality.  (Mr. Racicot also appreciated the pre- 
program appointments WHA/PD set up for him at the State 
Department and the American Enterprise Institute.) 
 
Mr. Racicot relayed his deep satisfaction with the Houston 
and New York programs as well as his disappointment with the 
Seattle program, where staff at a U.S. Senator's office 
provided a superficial briefing and visits to Weyerhauser, 
Starbucks or Boeing did not materialize. He did very much 
enjoy home hospitality in Seattle, however. 
 
Mr. Racicot came home with a sense of the diversity and 
vigor of the United States, and a newfound appreciation for 
the widespread change in attitude towards world affairs 
wrought by the events of September 2001.  The post is 
confident that his experience and the contacts he made will 
make a solid contribution to his ability to interpret U.S. 
policy and events in coming years. 
CELLUCCI