This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 005088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR FOR JASON BUNTIN; NEA/REA FOR SONIA 
FRANCESKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAID PGOV KU
SUBJECT: MEPI:  REQUEST FOR SPEAKER ON TRADE ISSUES FOR 
MEMBERS OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
REF: A. STATE 126550 
     ¶B. KUWAIT 2949 
 
¶1.  (U) As part of its MEPI country strategy, post will 
occasionally request speakers as current events necessitate. 
The first such request is for a return visit in December by 
Mr. Emad Tinawi, who made a preliminary trip to Kuwait in 
August. We would like Mr. Tinawi to conduct a training 
seminar for members of the National Assembly on free trade 
issues.  The GOK has indicated that it is ready to sign a 
Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) with the 
United States, and now is the opportune time to educate the 
deputies on what the agreement entails.  There are concerns 
in Kuwait about opening up the economy, and especially the 
effects that liberalization might have on Kuwaiti employment 
opportunities.  It is critical, therefore, that we provide 
the legislative branch with factual information on the TIFA 
and the broader topic of free trade at this relatively early 
stage, to counter any protectionist sentiments that might 
emerge.  This training seminar would also allow us to 
identify areas of particular concern among members of the 
National Assembly, so that we might tailor future MEPI 
outreach programs. 
 
¶2.  (U) This project falls under Kuwait's economic reform 
pillar (Ref B), and supports the MEPI goal of enhancing 
Kuwait's global competitiveness (Ref A). 
JONES