This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000912 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA AND DS/OP/WHA FROM EAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 4/14/13 
TAGS: ASEC HO PTER
SUBJECT: SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (SEPQ) 
 
REF: A. 03 STATE 53528 
     ¶B. 02 TEGUC 02934 (SEPQ 10/23/02) 
     ¶C. 02 TEGUC 0989 
 
Classified By: (U) Classified by: Deputy Chief of Mission, 
Roger Pierce, Reason 1.5 (C) and (D). 
 
(U) The following responses are keyed to the Security 
Environment Profile Questionnaire contained in Reftel (A). 
 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
¶1. (SBU) Demonstrations:  Responses to reftel (A). 
 
(1-A.)  Yes.  Additionally, there are a number of 
organizations and groups under the loose collective 
leadership of (and affiliated with) the Bloque Popular that 
have been carrying out anti-American demonstrations, as well 
as demonstrations targeting local issues.  The following 
organizations have been involved in anti-American political 
activities to varying degrees.  They are listed in 
alphabetical order, utilizing Spanish acronyms where 
applicable: 
 
- ARTISTA DE LAS UNAH 
  Official Artists of The National Autonomous University of 
  Honduras (UNAH) 
 
- BLOQUE POPULAR 
  Popular Block 
 
- COCOHS 
  Farmer's Cooperatives Union 
 
- CODECOH 
  Honduran Consumer Protection Committee 
 
- COFADEH 
  Honduran Committee of the Family Members of the 
  Detained and Disappeared 
 
- COHAPAZ 
  Honduran Action Committee for Peace 
 
- COLPROHSUMA 
  A small Teachers' Union 
 
- COMPA-H 
  People of the Americas Convergence Movement 
  (COMPA)Honduras 
 
- COPEMH 
  Honduran Association of Secondary School Teachers 
 
- COPINH 
  Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
  Indigenous Groups of Honduras (Also appears as COPIN) 
 
- COPRUMH 
  Professional Association Teachers' Union 
 
- CTH 
  Confederation of Honduran Workers 
 
- FSM 
  Feminist Movement (details needed) 
 
- FUR 
  University Revolutionary Front 
 
- FUT-H 
  United Federation of Honduran Workers (Sometimes FUTH) 
 
- GRUPO LOS NECIOS DE LA UNAH 
  UNAH Fools Group - Activist group in UNAH that "cheerleads" 
  and motivates demos 
 
- MEH 
  Honduran People's Student Movement 
 
- PARTIDO DE LOS TRABAJADORES DE LA FACULTAD DE PEDAGOGIA 
  DE LA UNAH 
  Teaching Faculty Workers' Party of UNAH 
 
- RADIO GUALCHO 
  Leftist/Activist radio station (1510Mhz), that works closely 
  with Bloque Popular and is actively involved in most 
anti-U.S. 
  demonstrations 
 
- REPRESENTANTE DE FRENTE Y REFORMA DE LA UNAH 
  Reform Front Representative of UNAH 
 
- SERUNAH 
  New group, UNAH Coalition like Popular Bloque 
 
- SETROINFOP 
  Details Needed 
- SITRAINA 
  National Agrarian Institute Workers' Union 
 
- SITRAIHSS 
  Institute of Social Security Workers' Union 
 
- SITRAUNAH 
  UNAH Workers' Union 
 
- SITRAUPEN 
  A Workers' Union (details needed) 
 
- STIBYS 
  Beverage and Associated Industries Workers' Union 
  (Plays a key organizing and logistics roll for many demos) 
 
- SITRAPANI 
  Child Welfare Association Workers' Union 
 
- UD 
  Democratic Unification Party 
  (represented in The National Congress) 
 
- UNAH 
  National Autonomous University of Honduras 
 
- URP 
  Revolutionary People's Union 
 
NOTE: The most anti-U.S. groups are: MEH, URP, UD, Bloque 
Popular, STIBYS, COPINH and COMPA-H. 
 
(1-B.) Yes.  There have been more than seven demonstrations 
in Tegucigalpa since December 2002, either at the Embassy or 
nearby locations.  Demo dates:  12/5/02, 01/25/03, 01/30/03, 
02/15/03, 03/8/03 and 03/27/03. 
 
(1-C.)  Over half of the demonstrations have taken place at 
or near the Embassy. 
 
(1-D.)  The size of anti-American demonstrations at the 
Embassy varies from twenty to over three hundred 
participants.  The larger demos usually consist of supporters 
from six to more than twelve different organizations, which 
operate as a loosely structured coalition under the guidance 
of Bloque Popular. 
 
(1-E.)  While there are demonstrations based on local issues, 
such as civil service salaries, privatization, IMF 
requirements, etc.  U.S. actions in Afghanistan and Iraq have 
become the current focus.  The following statements/demands 
have been made repeatedly during recent demos at the Embassy: 
 No to war in Iraq, No to war, Stop plan Colombia, Pro-Human 
rights, World Peace, Stop Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA), U.S. Forces out of Honduras (Soto Cano 
AB), Burning US flags, U.S. Military out of Cuba, U.S. 
destroy your WMD, Stop intervention in Venezuela, Stop 
Standard Fruit exploiting the indigenous people, No to CAFTA, 
No to privatization. 
 
(1-F.)  Generally peaceful, but demonstrators have burned 
U.S. flags, painted slogans on Mission outer perimeter walls 
and utilized homemade mortars to detonate large fireworks 
charges that are propelled high into the air before exploding. 
 
 
(1-G.)  N/A. 
 
(1-H.)  N/A. 
 
(1-I.)  Yes. 
 
(1-J.)  Yes.  Occasionally they will pass by the Embassy. 
(1-K.)  The size varies from a few hundred to 5-10 thousand 
people. 
(1-L.)  Generally peaceful, but fences and grillwork has been 
destroyed near the National Congress and many tires burned. 
At times suspected plain clothes police have been held and 
beaten by hard-core protestors within the demonstrations. 
 
(1-M.)  N/A. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Macro Conflict Conditions: 
 
(2-A.)  NO. 
 
(2-B.)  N/A. 
 
(2-C.)  N/A. 
 
(2-D.)  N/A. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Host Country Capabilities: 
 
(3-A.)  No. 
 
(3-B.)  Yes.  Training by US Border Patrol(BorTac) Teams 
good, but GOH security infrastructure needs major 
improvements. 
 
(3-C.)  Yes. 
 
(3-D.)  No.  However, GOH intelligence units have an 
institutional awareness of and a modest capability of 
penetrating indigenous radical groups. 
 
(3-E.)  Yes. 
 
(3-F.)  No. 
 
 
(3-G.)  Yes. 
 
(3-H.)  Average/Below Average. 
 
(3-I.)  Average/Ineffective. 
 
(3-J.)  Ineffective.  A new unit within the Ministry of 
Security has been established to handle border patrol duties 
but has yet to come fully on-line. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Indigenous Terrorism-Anti American Terrorist 
Groups: 
 
(4-A.)  No. 
 
(4-B.)  N/A. 
 
(4-C.)  N/A. 
 
(4-D.)  N/A. 
 
(4-E.)  N/A. 
 
(4-F.)  N/A. 
 
(4-G.)  N/A. 
 
(4-H.)  N/A. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Other Indigenous Terrorist Groups: 
 
(5-A.)  No. 
 
(5-B.)  N/A. 
 
(5-C.)  N/A. 
 
(5-D.)  N/A. 
 
(5-E.)  N/A. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Transnational Terrorism-Transnational Terrorist 
Indicators: 
(6-A.)  No.  However, there are rumors that there are Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA), IRA, and Chiapas(Zapatistas) 
sympathizers in Honduras who could be involved in advising 
indigenous groups.  Some Hondurans are studying in Cuba and 
also conceivably could be receiving training in subversion 
and terrorism, although it is more likely they are being 
indoctrinated as agents of influence.   As this Cuban program 
for Hondurans is in its infancy, there have been no 
indications that such training is taking place. 
 
(6-B.)  N/A. 
 
(6-C.)  N/A. 
 
(6-D.)  N/A and NO. 
 
(6-E.)  N/A. 
 
(6-F.)  The only known hostile intelligence presence of note 
is Cuban.  While the Cuban mission appears to have extensive 
contacts with leftists and indigenous groups, there is no 
indication they are planning or supporting terrorism. 
 
(6-H.)  There is no shortage of weapons in Honduras.  It 
would also not be difficult for hostile terrorist elements to 
import weapons and/or explosives from neighboring countries. 
 
¶7.  Information is being updated regarding 
groups/organizations listed in para 1-A.  Future list will 
contain the full Spanish names for the groups.  The POC for 
additions/corrections to the list is RSO Tegucigalpa. 
Palmer