This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM IZ TU ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
MARCH 05, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for March 05, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. ELECTION EXCITEMENT  IN SIIRT 
( Dunya/Tercuman/Turkiye)   Excitement increases 
as the elections in Siirt approach.   It appears 
as though AK Party leader Recep Erdogan will gain 
his presidency from Siirt. Erdogan was  banned 
from politics because of a speech he gave 4 years 
ago in the same town.  AK Party is confident they 
will bring out 3 deputies, since DEHAP withdrew 
from the elections. The election will be held on 
Sunday March 9, between 6:00 and 15:00.   The 
following parties will participate in the 
election: TKP (Turkish Communist Party), IP 
(Labor party), CHP (Peoples Republican Party) and 
AK Party (Justice and Development Party). The 
other parties have announced that they will not 
participate in the election. 
 
 
¶3. WAR PREPARATIONS CONTINUE IN BATMAN 
(Evrensel)  Ramps for Patriot missiles have been 
set up in Batman airport and will be operated by 
Dutch soldiers.  It is reported that 200 trucks 
carrying equipment arrived at the Batman airport 
under the modernization project. Large numbers of 
work machines from various provinces were brought 
to Batman Village Services Directorate.  It is 
reported that the machines are going to be sent 
to the camps that will be set up for refugees. 
 
 
¶4. ERBAKAN`S DEMAND REJECTED 
(Cumhuriyet/Sabah)  The State Security Court in 
Diyarbakir rejected a request to purge the 
judicial records of Necmettin Erbakan, the last 
president of the closed Refah party (Prosperity 
Party).  Erbakan`s attorney, Mehmet Ener pointed 
out that the decision would not affect Erbakan`s 
right to vote or to be elected. 
 
 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. NO TO WAR BUT YES TO DOLLAR 
(Tercuman)   MP Mahmut Duyan, CHP (Peoples 
Republican Party) deputy and president of 
Industrialist and Businessmen`s Association in 
Mardin, said "no to war" and voted against 
permitting American troops use Turkish bases.  On 
the other hand, he rented his factory in 
Kiziltepe, Mardin to the American army.  Duyan`s 
reply to the criticism regarding the issue was 
that he had rented a factory that belonged to 
him, which is not of interest to anyone and it is 
not a contradiction, it is only trade.  It is 
reported that security forces prevented an 
American military attachQ to enter the region. 
HOLTZ