This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 002788 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP A/S KELLY AND EAP/BCLTV 
 
ALSO FOR INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINR VM FR
SUBJECT:  MFA RESHUFFLES -- GOOD NEWS FOR U.S. 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request -- see para 6. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Deputy Foreign Minister Le Van Bang informed 
Ambassador October 31 that his area of responsibility had 
been shifted from the Northeast Asia portfolio to the 
Americas, effective that day.  He noted that the news would 
not be announced until early November and asked that we not 
share publicly.  He will retain oversight for International 
Organization affairs (including human rights), budget and 
finance, and international NGOs. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Senior Deputy Foreign Minister Nguyen Dinh Bin 
will be named Ambassador to France.  Comment:  Bin has been 
an often difficult interlocutor, usually prickly and 
aggressive.  While he understands English, he prefers to 
respond in Vietnamese.  End comment 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Bang indicated that he would be "at least" #3 in 
the MFA hierarchy.  This likely means that Deputy Le Cong 
Phung, who will retain responsibility for European affairs 
and may assume duties for Middle East and African affairs, 
will be the senior Deputy.  Bang confirmed that the number 
of Deputy Ministers will go down to only three (from the 
current five), although there are also two Assistant Foreign 
Ministers (one of whom is simultaneously Director General of 
the Americas Department). 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Deputy Foreign Minister Nguyen Phu Binh will take 
over the Northeast Asia account.  Bang noted that Binh 
speaks fluent Korean, having both studied in North Korea and 
served as the SRV Ambassador in Seoul. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Comment and action request:  Bang's oversight of 
American affairs is good news for the U.S.-Vietnam bilateral 
relationship, to which Bang has devoted most of his 
professional career.  He remains an enthusiastic promoter of 
better ties, and will be seeking to establish a new, more 
formal "framework" for comprehensive relations, including a 
"roadmap" for more regular activities and high-level visits. 
(Vietnam has signed similar framework agreements with the 
PRC and other major partners.)  Embassy recommends the 
following congratulatory message from A/S Kelly to DFM Bang: 
Begin text 
 
H.E. Mr. Le Van Bang 
Deputy Foreign Minister 
Socialist Republic of Vietnam: 
 
Dear Mr. Minister, 
 
I was delighted to hear that you will assume responsibility 
for the Americas portfolio in your Ministry.  Your personal 
contributions to the steady improvement of U.S.-Vietnam 
ties, including both the formal establishment of diplomatic 
relations and your successful tour in Washington, D.C. as 
the first SRV Ambassador, have been notable and much 
appreciated. 
 
I wish you the very best of luck in your new and still 
challenging responsibilities, and look forward to working 
closely with you to promote even better ties between our two 
countries, which is clearly in the interests of both our 
nations and peoples.  I hope to welcome you soon to 
Washington, perhaps first during the upcoming visit of 
Deputy Prime Minister Vu Khoan. 
 
Best regards. 
Sincerely, 
James A. Kelly 
end text 
BURGHARDT