This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2013 
TAGS: PREL PHUM BM MY ASSK NLD
SUBJECT: RAZALI AND THE NLD VIDEOTAPE 
 
REF: KUALA LUMPUR 7484 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
 ¶1. (C) Reftel indicated that UN Special Envoy Razali had 
requested a copy of the NLD videotape of the May 2003 ASSK 
convoy in northern Burma.  His intention to provide the tape 
to certain international journalists as a way to bring 
external pressure on the SPDC would fulfill a request by 
ASSK, as we understand it, through NLD intermediaries. 
 
¶2. (C) We would be happy to pouch a copy of the videotape to 
Embassy KL.  We note that the tape is primarily raw footage 
of the convoy and of various ASSK and NLD speeches, all in 
Burmese.  Shots of large crowds of supporters that number in 
the tens of thousands and scenes of aggressive MI and USDA 
thugs are visually very powerful.  However, we believe it 
would be most effective for an Embassy Rangoon officer to 
brief Razali during a viewing of the tape.  In addition to 
the speeches and chants in Burmese, the tape includes 
numerous posters and signs written in Burmese as well as 
footage of monks, pro-NLD villagers, anti-NLD protesters, and 
GOB handlers that create a subtle, yet crucial, sub-text to 
the convoy story. 
 
¶3. (C) We would suggest that Embassy KL communicate to Razali 
our offer to brief him on the videotape.  The most convenient 
opportunity to do so would be if Razali plans to be in 
Bangkok again soon, or during his next visit to Rangoon. 
Should neither opportunity be a short-term possibility, we 
could also send a briefing officer to KL with the videotape 
in hand. 
Martinez