This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001654 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL KAWC KJUS LI NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: CONCERNED ABOUT TAYLOR, WANTS MISBEHAVIOR 
EVIDENCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 269609 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1630 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶C. LAGOS 1928 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY CDA ROGER MEECE FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) AND (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) President Obasanjo is still out of the country and FM 
Adeniji will not return to Nigeria from the U.S. until after 
October 1, so CDA used a courtesy call on MFA MinState 
Samaila to reiterate our concerns about Charles Taylor (Ref 
A).  The discussion also covered Guinea-Bissau (septel).  CDA 
noted USG appreciation and support for Nigeria's accepting 
Taylor to gain peace in Liberia, and underscored our concern 
that Taylor not be allowed to continue to foment trouble in 
Liberia.  CDA referred to continuing reports of Taylor's 
misbehavior, and urged the GON to consider handing Taylor 
over to the International Tribunal if he violates the terms 
of his exile. 
 
 
¶2. (C) MinState Samaila replied that Taylor had been straying 
from the exile terms at first, and President Obasanjo had 
summoned him to his ranch September 4 to demand better 
behavior (Ref C).  Obasanjo told Taylor that Nigeria had 
evidence of his misbehavior, and specifically told Taylor to 
do nothing directly to interfere in Liberia nor indirectly 
that would hurt the chances for peace there.  Since then the 
GON had seen no violations, Samaila said, and he asked the 
CDA to pass to him any evidence the USG might see. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Samaila outlined that the GON had spent billions of 
dollars over the years on Liberia, and President Obasanjo and 
other senior GON officials were now spending considerable 
time on Liberia and Guinea-Bissau.  After dressing down 
Taylor, Obasanjo had also met with NTGL Chairman Bryant to 
reiterate Nigeria's determination to get Liberia back on its 
feet.  If Nigeria received evidence that Taylor was still 
interfering in Liberia, the GON would act against him.  CDA 
responded that we wished to cooperate fully regarding 
Taylor's capacity to create further problems. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Samaila closed the discussion on Liberia by launching 
a monologue regarding planning for the new UN peacekeeping 
force for Liberia.  He strongly asserted that the GON needed 
it to be commanded by a Nigerian. 
MEECE