This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L MONTREAL 001212 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
NOFORN FOR DS/ICI/PII, OTTAWA FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 1.6 X 1 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: WALK-IN REPORTS SUSPICIOUS PILOT IN TRAINING 
 
 
Classified By: RSO MICHAEL H. NELSON FOR REASON 1.5 (D) 
 
¶1.  (C/NF) On September 4, 2003, Canadian Citizen Michel 
Boissoneault (Source) approached the United States Consulate 
in Montreal and advised that in his employment as a valet and 
a night security guard of an upscale condominium complex in 
downtown Montreal (million dollar condominiums), that he has 
observed a Middle Eastern male whom he identified as Amin 
Murji whom he believes is acting suspiciously for reasons 
noted in para 4. 
 
¶2.  (C/NF) Boissoneault has requested that his name be 
protected because the owner of the condominium that Murji 
resides in, is very anti-American and Boissonneault advised 
of severe repercussions for him if it is divulged that he 
provided the information to the United States Government. 
 
¶3.  (C/NF) Source advised that he has observed on multiple 
occasions (while parking Murji's Jeep Grand Cherokee) papers, 
various air charts and other material indicating that Murji 
is taking flying lessons in Canada.  He also observed a 
pilot's air permit for Murji numbered 5802 9013 82. 
Boissoneault provided the license plate number for the Grand 
Cherokee and it is registered to a subject identified as 
Maurizio Verrelli. 
 
¶4.  (C/NF) Source advised that Murji, whom he identified as a 
Muslim, often returns to the condominium complex at very late 
hours (2 to 5 a.m.) and that he pays 5,000 Canadian dollars a 
month to reside in the Condominium complex, but he does not 
appear to be employed in any job. 
 
¶5.  (C/NF) Source was concerned that the United States 
Government be made aware of Murji in the event that he is 
planning hostile action against the United States. 
 
¶6.  (C) The POC for this matter is RSO Michael H. Nelson, 
AmConGen Montreal, (514) 398-0731. 
ALLEN