This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004160 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR PM/RSAT (SARA HORNER) 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR TU
SUBJECT: THIRD COUNTRY TRANSFER: GOT REQUEST TO SELL MURAT 
REIS (USS RAZORBACK) SUBMARINE 
 
REF: A. 02 ANKARA 5784 
     ¶B. 02 ANKARA 7719 
 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See para 4. 
 
 
¶2. The Embassy recently received a diplomatic note from the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs requesting information on this 
submarine re-transfer request. This is the third diplomatic 
note we have received from the MFA regarding this case. The 
first two were dated August 1, 2002 (ref A) and October 19, 
2002 (ref B). 
 
 
¶3. Begin text of MFA note No: 2003/ALGY/252944: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the Ministry's notes 
numbered 2002/ALGY/29317, dated August 1, 2002, and 
2002/ALGY/399244, dated October 19, 2002 has the honor to 
request information regarding the outcome of the request for 
assistance to obtain the US Government's approval for the 
sale of Murat Reis (Ex. USS Razorback) submarine to the USS 
Razorback/Murat Reis Association resident in North Little 
Rock, Arkansas. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
Ankara, June 20, 2003. 
 
 
end text. 
 
 
¶4.  Action request: Embassy asks that the Department, in 
coordination with other appropriate agencies, review the 
GOT's request and inform the Embassy of its decision as soon 
as possible. 
PEARSON