This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
EMBASSY VIENNA, PLEASE PASS TO IAEA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ABUD KNNP TRGY PREL OVIP OPDC IAEA
SUBJECT: NIGERIA UNLIKELY TO OFFER SUBSTANTIAL SUPPORT FOR 
IAEA BUDGET INCREASE 
 
 
REF: STATE 013752 
 
 
 
 
¶1. (U) On January 24 ECONOFF passed Deputy Secretary 
Armitage's letter (REFTEL) to the Ministry's Assistant 
Director for First United Nations Division A.O. Idowum who 
said he would pass it to Foreign Minister Lamido.  Idowu was 
aware of the proposed increase in the IAEA's 2004-2005 
budget. While noncommittal on the proposed increase, he 
claimed that Nigeria is up to date in its financial 
obligation to the IAEA. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Idowu has been handling IAEA and disarmament issues 
for the past four years and he rates Nigeria's engagement 
with the IAEA highly, specifically thanking the IAEA for 
training staff of the National Hospital, National Agency for 
Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC), and 
academics from a number of universities during the last two 
years. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) Idowu also showed an interest in the International 
Conference on Security of Radioactive Sources March 10-13, 
2003 in Vienna.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will inform 
the Energy Commission of Nigeria and the Nigerian Nuclear 
Regulatory Authority, advising both organizations to send 
representatives to the conference. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment:  It is doubtful that Idowu's enthusiasm and 
support will be reflected in tangible Nigerian support for an 
IAEA budget increase at a time when Nigeria's budget is 
already stretched thin.  For instance, the Foreign Ministry 
has reportedly been unable to pay its power and telephone 
bills in many embassies.  However, Idowu assured us Deputy 
Secretary Armitage's letter would reach the Foreign 
 
SIPDIS 
Minister's desk with a positive recommendation. 
 
 
JETER