This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER AADP CASC EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - 23 FEBRUARY 2003 
 
Classified By: RSO Tim Laas, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin summary: The Ambassador convened an EAC 
meeting on February 23 to assess recent threat information 
and discuss security-related issues.  Also mentioned was EAP 
readiness and the need to prepare for a future conflict in 
Iraq.  Key offices and personnel represented at the meeting 
included: CHG, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, ORCA, OMC, SOC 
YEMEN, RMO, FPD AND FBI.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  The EAC began their discussion with a review of the 
threat environment in light of the shooting of a British 
defense contractor in Saudi Arabia.  EAC members noted that a 
similar scenario could play out in Yemen.  Accordingly, the 
EAC agreed that Mission personnel should again be urged to 
vary their times and routes and avoid a predictable pattern 
in any other way. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The EAC discussed the fact that the British Embassy 
in Sanaa had drawn down to the to a minimal staff working out 
of the Ambassador's residence.  According to the DCM this was 
a pattern for British missions throughout the region, but 
also reflected the British concern that their Chancery was 
vulnerable because it lacked adequate standoff. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The EAC noted that the U.S. mission granted 
authorized departures for Embassy staff in Kuwait, Saudi 
Arabia, Beirut, Syria, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem.  The Ambassador 
asked the EAC if any members thought that American Embassy 
Sanaa should consider requesting such a departure status at 
this time.  The EAC unanimously recommended not requesting 
authorized departure status at this time because the past has 
been at high security alert for some time and has procedures 
in place to manage the existing threat. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  EAC members were briefed about the large number of 
FSN and Direct Hire American staff that had opted to receive 
the Smallpox vaccination following excellent briefings 
provided by a TDY State Department medical team in Sanaa. 
The Ambassador noted that the likelihood of a biological 
attack in Sanaa remained small but the potential existed for 
someone regionally to become infected before traveling to 
Yemen at which time he/she might expose inhabitants in Yemen 
to the virus.  The RMO discussed the fact that Anthrax 
inoculations would follow smallpox vaccinations at an 
unspecified time in the future. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The Administrative Officer briefed the EAC that 
Escape Masks being held by ROYG customs would be released 
shortly.  The RSO noted that a training team was scheduled to 
train Embassy personnel beginning on March 10, 2003.  (Note 
the masks were in fact released to the Embassy on February 
24.) 
 
¶7.  (U)  The DCM briefed EAC members on the success of First 
Responder Training recently provided by the RMO. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The RSO informed the EAC team that the EAP had been 
finalized by TDY RSO Nick Mariano and was ready for EAC 
Chairman review and approval before send-out. 
 
¶9.  (U)  The DCM reminded EAC members about the newly updated 
phone tree to be used in the event of a crisis. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  The DCM invited SOC-Yemen and other EAC members to 
review and provide input into the recently revised Drawdown 
List updated by the DCM, ADMOFF, COMSOFF and RSO. 
 
¶11. (SBU)  EAC members reviewed tentative "Hunker Down" 
Guidelines in the event of hostilities between the U.S. led 
coalition and Iraq.  Subjects covered included: 
 
     Sleeping Arrangements 
     FSN Access 
     Cafeteria 
     Reminder to bring overnight bag to office NOW 
     Have cash on hand 
     Update POA as necessary 
 
¶12. (SBU)  The EAC noted the success of a Safe Haven Drill 
administered by the RSO on 20 February at 0900 hours with the 
entire Embassy staff. 
 
¶13. (SBU)  The RSO noted that a Destruction Drill would be 
held on February 25, 2003.  The DCM reminded EAC members of 
the importance of keeping burn times to less than 1 hour in 
each section. 
¶14. (SBU)  The ADMINOFF reviewed post mail handling 
guidelines formulated to avoid the risk of Chancery 
contamination in case of any future white powder incidents. 
HULL