This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          MAY 28, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for May 28, 2003.  Please note that Turkish press 
reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2.  Radikal: An investigation was begun against 
Enis Alkan, a senior student at Ataturk 
University in Erzurum, because officials believe 
Alkan made a pro-Kurdish statement with his 
signature while filing a petition with the 
university for mid-term exams. The report from 
the security directorate stated, "although the 
meaning of the signature is not being examined in 
our laboratory, the signature resembles the word 
Kurtculuk (Kurdism)." Alkan was dismissed from 
the university. Alkan's request for suspension of 
the act by the university was denied at the local 
administrative court on the grounds that there 
was no serious opposition to the law or 
irrecoverable losses. Alkan is waiting for the 
result of the appeal he made to the Regional 
Administrative Court. 
 
 
¶3.  Radikal: In Kazanci village of Diyarbakir, 
the elementary school teacher required a sick 
student to read an anthem that begins with "happy 
is he who says I am a Turk."  Because the student 
chanted it silently, the teacher misunderstood 
the student, and thought he said "happy is he who 
says I am a Kurd;" and charges were brought 
against the student at the State Security Court. 
The unidentified student, who was tried at 
Diyarbakir State Security Court, was acquitted on 
the grounds that moral components of the crime 
were not constituted. 
 
 
¶4.  Radikal: Police in Hakkari used an 
interesting method to determine people who 
shouted pro-Ocalan and PKK/KADEK organization 
slogans during the Newruz festivities in Hakkari 
on March 21. Thirteen persons viewed with open 
mouths in pictures taken by police were 
interrogated for having shouted pro-separatist 
organization slogans. The police filed a petition 
with the office of the Chief Public Prosecutor of 
Hakkari against the suspects for "supporting and 
harboring the organization," and demanded a 
warrant of arrest in absentia be issued for eight 
suspects not found at their addresses. Five other 
suspects were arraigned. Later the court released 
the suspects because of lack of solid evidence. 
The suspects' attorney, Mikhail Demiroglu, said 
the police did not have sound records of the 
people accused, and it was difficult to 
understand what was said and by whom at a place 
where thirty thousand people had gathered. 
 
 
¶5.  Evrensel: A court in Tunceli gave a one month 
imprisonment sentence to 30 persons, including 
HADEP's former Provincial Chairman Alcan Onlu, 
and the former Provincial Chairman of EMEP, Salih 
Gundogan, for attending the May 1 Labor Day 
Meeting in Tunceli. Regarding the issue, an 
attorney from Tunceli Bar Association, Baris 
Yildirim, said, although the OHAL (State of 
Emergency Rule) has been lifted, its effects 
still continue. Yildirim said the people had 
gathered to celebrate Labor Day, and making a 
press release was not a crime by law. Yildirim 
said they would appeal the court's decision. 
 
 
¶6.  Milli Gazete/Bolge: Adana Governor Kemal Onal 
said there was a pressing need in Adana for five 
thousand classrooms in elementary schools and 925 
classrooms in secondary schools. Governor Onal 
said because Adana received influxes of 
immigrants, the need for classrooms increased. 
The Governor also stated 300 teachers, appointed 
to Adana for health and family reasons, were 
receiving their salaries without teaching any 
classes. Onal claimed that most of the immigrants 
had multiple children and the need for classrooms 
was mainly felt in Yuregir and Seyhan districts 
of the town. Governor Onal said he was expecting 
support from private citizens and companies to 
resolve the issue. He added they spent 
approximately 2.750 million USD for 
transportation of 13,500 students throughout the 
province. 
 
 
¶7.  Hurriyet: Three hundred physicians and nurses 
from various towns were trained on "Family 
Planning Standardization Education" at the 
Yavuzlar Infirmary in Adana. Adana Provincial 
Health Director, Dr. Serdar Mercan, stated their 
objective is to give standard, good quality 
family planning service in all Health Ministry- 
affiliated institutions. Mercan said a team 
consisting of 15 persons started the education 
program in Adana in 2000. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
¶8.  Bolge: The President of Chamber of Commerce 
in Adana, Saban Bas, said they would open an 
International Fair in September in Adana. He 
stated this fair would be vitally important for 
promoting the trade in the Southern and 
Southeastern regions. Bas said the fair would be 
set up on 50 acres of land with 11 thousand 
square meters of covered area for tents. Bas said 
permanent buildings for the fair would be built 
in coming years. 
HOLTZ