This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 002935 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ JO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DELIVERS DEMARCHE ON REORGANIZATION OF 
THE IRAQI MFA AND RECALL OF COM TO FONMIN MUASHER 
 
REF: (A) STATE 126507 (B) AMMAN 2871 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (U) The Ambassador delivered ref A demarche to Foreign 
Minister Muasher May 19 during a meeting that covered a 
number of issues (other topics reported septels).  (Note: 
A/DCM had previously delivered the same message to Muasher's 
personal assistant, Ali Al-Ayed on May 14 (ref B)). 
 
¶2. (C) Muasher listened carefully to the Ambassador's 
presentation and then offered the following comments:  The 
GOJ no longer recognizes the Iraqi Ambassador as the 
representative of Iraq.  However, King Abdullah has offered 
him "protection" and, Muasher added, the Iraqi Ambassador has 
not engaged in any activities related to the old regime since 
its fall.  The issue of the Iraqi Ambassador's compliance 
with the order issued by the newly-reconstituted Iraqi MFA is 
"an issue between him and his Ministry."  If the Iraqi 
Ambassador chooses to return to Iraq on his own, that's fine. 
 If, however, he refuses to return as ordered, then Jordan 
"will have to look at what our obligations are under 
international law."  The Ambassador also noted ref A 
instructions that the Iraqi Embassy no longer had authority 
to issue visas, use consular seals or carry out other 
official duties.  Muasher underlined that he understood the 
U.S.'s concerns and interests as the occupying power, but 
said he would have to consult with his legal experts before 
providing a more definitive answer. 
 
 
GNEHM