This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 9, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Powell: We will warn the Kurds - Hurriyet 
Bremer warns Kurds - Hurriyet 
Turkish troops will pass through N. Iraq - Milliyet 
Turkish troops in Iraq in November at the latest - 
Turkiye 
TGS considering 16,000 troops for Iraq - Milliyet 
Bremer can't convince the Iraqis - Sabah 
Israel might strike 17 targets in Damascus - Hurriyet 
Governor Arnie - Huriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Rumsfeld appreciates Turkey's Iraq decision - 
Cumhuriyet 
Bremer to Iraqis: U.S. will have the last word - 
Cumhuriyet 
Rumsfeld angered at transfer of Iraq authority to Rice 
- Zaman 
EU respects Turkey's Iraq decision - Zaman 
Dutch PM supports Turkey on Iraq - Yeni Safak 
Yearly cost of Turkish troops in Iraq, $540 million - 
Yeni Safak 
EU respects Turkey's Iraq decision, Athens criticizes - 
Radikal 
Israel stepping up tension - Radikal 
Bush considering economic sanctions on Syria - Zaman 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Location of Turkish peacekeepers in Iraq:  "Hurriyet" 
says that Ankara wants to deploy troops around 
Salahaddin to be closer to the Turkmen population in 
the north.  However, the Americans believe that having 
Turks around the Kurdish town of Salahaddin would cause 
serious concerns, and the U.S. prefers that they be 
deployed in the al-Anbar zone, northwest of Baghdad. 
Turkey is considering sending 5,000-6,000 troops 
initially under the command of Major General Umit 
Sahinturk, who will work in coordination with General 
Ricardo Sanchez.  "Milliyet" writes that the TGS has 
drafted plans for deployment of 6,000-16,000 soldiers 
in Iraq.  Poland and Iraq will send delegations to 
Ankara to discuss economic issues related to the 
deployment. 
Ankara wants transit passage through N. Iraq:  The MFA 
said that Turkey wants to use a Northern Iraq corridor 
for transit passage of troops into Iraq.   An MFA 
spokesman dismissed objections by members of the Iraqi 
Governing Council, saying that they had voiced only 
their personal views.  "Turkey has no hidden agenda in 
Iraq. It is out in the open for everybody to see," MFA 
Spokesman Huseyin Dirioz told reporters at a news 
conference in Ankara on Wednesday.  Ankara also wants 
to use Syrian territory for the transport of armored 
brigades via railroad into Iraq, according to 
"Milliyet."  Ankara is planning to establish a direct 
motorway connection between the Turkish logistical 
support center in Silopi and the headquarters of 
Turkish troops in Iraq.  The U.S. thinks Turkey should 
not open a corridor through Northern Iraq for transport 
of logistical supply, and offered to meet the costs of 
sending and sustaining Turkish peacekeepers to Iraq. 
Turkey rejected the offer, saying it would provide for 
its own troops in Iraq, "Sabah" reports. 
Washington moves to silence Kurds' opposition to 
Turkish peacekeepers:  Secretary of State Powell phoned 
Foreign Minister Gul to assure him about statements by 
Iraqi governing council officials objecting to Turkish 
peacekeepers in Iraq.  Papers report Paul Bremer as 
reminding that the final decision regarding a Turkish 
military presence in Iraq will be made by the 
coalition, not by the Iraqis.  "Vatan" believes Bremer 
failed to convince the Kurds to accept Turkish troops. 
Papers also report Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld as 
assuring Turkey that such problems would be resolved. 
Turkey might receive additional U.S. loans:  The U.S. 
State Department has signaled that Turkey might be 
given financial support in addition to the $8.5 billion 
loan provided recently by Washington.  "Radikal" 
speculates that the U.S. could meet the cost of the 
Turkish troop deployment in Iraq.  "Hurriyet" thinks 
the U.S. will meet some of the cost of the deployment. 
"Hurriyet" estimates the yearly expenses of Turkish 
troops in Iraq at $60 million, while "Yeni Safak" 
claims it would amount to $540 million. 
FM Gul briefs mission chiefs on Turks to Iraq:  Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul briefed all foreign ambassadors 
based in Ankara on the deployment decision on 
Wednesday.  Gul reportedly gave the following messages: 
Turkey, acting in line with UN Resolution 1483, will 
enhance the stabilization of Iraq.  But Turkey would 
still regard a new UN resolution as significant. 
Turkish troops will face fewer problems in Iraq, since 
the Iraqis are relatives and brothers of the Turks. 
Responding to a question about the opposition voiced by 
some Iraqi Governing Council members, Gul said that 
convincing the Iraqis was a U.S. responsibility. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq/Turkish troops for Iraq 
 
 
"The Decree Success" 
Fikret Ertan wrote in the Islamist-intellectual Zaman 
(10/9): "The parliamentary decision is an important 
step toward Turkey's possible role in Iraq.  Following 
the negotiation process with the US, and after making 
sure of the protection of crucial Turkish national 
interests, the Turkish forces will have their place in 
Iraq. . In the meantime, there are circles who try to 
undermine Turkey's possible involvement in Iraq.  Anti- 
Turkish statements by Kurdish groups are deliberately 
highlighted in an exaggerated tone. . Such efforts led 
to the rejection of Turkish involvement by the Turkish 
parliament on March 1.  This time, despite the 
opposition's efforts, the authorization decree has been 
approved.  The credit should go to the AKP leadership, 
including Prime Minister Erdogan and Foreign Minister 
Gul." 
 
 
"Historic Decision by Turkish Democracy" 
Cengiz Candar commented in conservative DB Tercuman 
(10/9): "The parliament's decision has provided a clear 
and strong message: The Turkish military presence in 
Iraq will be a temporary peace mission, it does not 
intend to become an occupational force.  The decision 
also provides support for the US.  Let us not forget 
the fact that any failure the US might experience in 
Iraq will have a colossal effect and would be directly 
against Turkey's regional interests. . The technical 
details to be worked out with the US.  However, Turkey 
should not wait for the UN decision, nor even mention 
it.  Being part of a UN force will only lessen Turkey's 
role and influence.  Turkey should arrange its mission 
by having bilateral contacts with the US, and it should 
be given equal status with the UK.  Turkish forces in 
Iraq should be significant, and more the better. 
Sending only a symbolic number of troops does not make 
any sense.  As far as Turkey's involvement is 
concerned, Turkey should think of sending possibly more 
than 10,000 troops.  The issue of Turkish military 
presence in Iraq should be worked out via consensus 
within the Iraqi Governing Council as well 
 
 
EDELMAN