This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 KATHMANDU 001423 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, SA/RA 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PINS CASC NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: MAOISTS REPORTEDLY IN DELHI CONSIDER THE 
GOVERNMENT'S OFFER 
 
REF: A. A. KATHMANDU 1413 
 
     ¶B. B. KATHMANDU 1418 
     ¶C. C. KATHMANDU 1041 
     ¶D. D. KATHMANDU 1388 
     ¶E. E. KATHMANDU 848 
     ¶F. F. STATE 219519 
     ¶G. G. NEW DELHI 4101 (NOTAL) 
     ¶H. H. NEW DELHI 219512 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b) and 
 (d). 
 
Summary 
======== 
 
¶1.  (S) In a series of meetings with Government of Nepal 
(GoN) negotiators and security officials on July 30, the 
Ambassador discussed development in the GoN's exchanges with 
the Maoist leadership over the previous twenty-four hours. 
The GoN formally responded to the Maoists' recent demands on 
July 29, offering concessions in a number of areas but 
distancing itself from controversial decisions reportedly 
made during the first two rounds of peace talks.  The 
spokesman for the government negotiating team feels that the 
GoN has done all it can and the ball is firmly in the 
Maoists' court.  The Nepal police believe that the Maoist 
leadership is unsure how to address the GoN's response.  The 
police also have reports that top Maoist leaders are meeting 
in Delhi to consider their next move and are working to 
solicit support from the European Commission and the Indian 
government.  The police chief does not predict that the 
Maoists pose a heightened risk to Americans in Nepal, but 
will likely continue with their rhetoric.  The GoN requests 
strong U.S. Government support should the cease-fire break. 
End summary. 
 
Maoist Leadership Undecided on Conflict? 
========================================= 
 
¶2.  (C) The Ambassador met with Inspector General of Police 
(IGP) Shayam Bakta Thapa to discuss developments during the 
last twenty-four hours.  The IGP reported that the Government 
of Nepal's (GoN) July 29 letter has thrown the Maoist 
leadership, presently meeting in Delhi, into a dilemma on how 
to proceed.  He believes that the Maoists did not expect the 
government to provide any concessions or take their demands 
seriously.  IGP Thapa also reported that the Maoists in New 
Delhi were preparing letters to Ambassador Caillouet, Head of 
the European Delegation in New Delhi, and to the Government 
of India to appeal for their assistance.  IGP Thapa 
complained about the continuing lack of Indian assistance to 
rein in the Maoists.  He recalled events of several years ago 
when a joint operation by the Royal Nepalese Army and Indian 
police to arrest Maoist leaders meeting in Gorakhpur, India 
was called off with a phone call from Delhi. 
 
¶3.  (C) According to the IGP, the Nepalese police learned 
that during the cease-fire the Maoists collected limited 
amounts of explosives, weapons, and ammunition but that the 
Maoist leadership and affiliated organizations do not want to 
return to armed struggle.  That said, both IGP Thapa and the 
Ambassador assessed that the Maoists have bellies of cadre to 
be both fed and politically fired and that the group cannot 
sit idle for fear of losing their standing force through 
desertion. 
 
¶4.  (C) When the Ambassador asked for the IGP's overall 
assessment of the situation, he replied that, "yesterday, I 
thought the cease-fire would break; today, I am more 
hopeful."  He continued to say that if it did break, more of 
the fighting would take place in urban areas, i.e., Kathmandu 
Valley.  He bemoaned the return to combat that has already 
seen the deaths of 996 Nepalese police officers.  IGP Thapa 
also assessed that the Maoists would not likely target 
Americans, but would continue verbal threats. 
 
Ball in Maoists' Court 
======================= 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Minister for Information and Communications and GoN 
negotiation team spokesperson Kamal Thapa phoned the 
Ambassador to update him on the government's reply to the 
Maoists.  Late July 29, the GoN sent a response to the 
Maoists' July 28 letter addressing each of their five 
ultimata and the July 31 deadline.  Thapa reported that in 
recognition of the gravity of the situation, the government 
had no choice but to send a prompt reply.  (Demands made by 
the Maoists were reported ref A.) 
-- Demand 1, Execution of Previous Agreements:  On July 29, 
the GoN released three Maoist central committee members (ref 
B) and one recently arrested Maoist extortionist; made public 
the whereabouts of 36 Maoists (15 of whom were killed prior 
to the cease-fire); and committed to publishing the 
government's information on all 322 persons listed as missing 
by the Maoists.  The GoN reportedly had committed to these 
steps in previous rounds of negotiations. 
 
-- Demand 2, Role of the King in the Peace Talks:  The GoN 
response to the Maoist demand reiterated King Gyanendra's 
June 5 announcement that he was conferring executive power on 
the Prime Minister and Cabinet (ref C).  (Note:  The GoN 
response carefully avoided a commitment to involve the King 
directly in future rounds of peace talks.  End note.) 
 
-- Demand 3, Role of the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA):  The GoN 
affirmed that the RNA is a constitutional body, will follow 
the government's orders, and faithfully implement decision 
reached at the peace talks.  (Note:  The government did not 
address the 5-kilometer restriction on military movements 
reportedly agreed to during the second round of talks, ref D. 
 End note.) 
 
-- Demand 4, Abrogation of Antiterrorism Training Agreement 
(ATA) and Termination of U.S. Security Assistance:  The GoN 
responded that the ATA is an international agreement that 
supports GoN policies in countering terrorism  (ref E).  The 
GoN response went on to state that ATAs have been signed by a 
number of countries, including India, in order to better 
coordinate technical assistance.  Thapa reported that the 
letter described exchanges between the U.S. and the RNA as 
"normal and historical." 
 
-- Demand 5, Public Announcement of the GoN Political Agenda 
for the Peace Talks:  The GoN's response stated simply that 
the government's agenda would be tabled when talks resumed. 
 
¶6.  Thapa reported to the Ambassador that the government has 
demonstrated maximum flexibility in its response to the 
Maoists.  He stated further that the "ball is firmly in the 
Maoists' court;" the government can make no more concessions. 
 The GoN has not yet received a response from the Maoists. 
Thapa is hopeful that growing public pressure will force the 
Maoists to reply.  Thapa does not expect an immediate return 
to hostilities; however, he believes that the Maoists will 
attempt to play the government for additional time and 
concessions. 
 
¶7.  The Ambassador advised Thapa of the talking points Post 
will deliver to Maoist representatives today (ref F; details 
on the delivery will be provided septel).  The Ambassador and 
Thapa committed to remain in touch. 
 
The Government Asks for Strong USG Support 
=========================================== 
 
¶8.  (C) In a meeting with the USAID Country Director and the 
Ambassador, Minister of Finance and government negotiation 
team head Prakash Lohani described the state of the 
negotiations.  He judges that former minister and negotiator 
Narayan Singh Pun had made serious missteps by allowing the 
Maoists to engage in broad negotiations and agreeing to 
consider the country as divided into two parts, the Maoists 
in the rural areas and the GoN in the cities.  Lohani also 
believes that Pun gave the Maoist negotiators an unrealistic 
vision of the peace process, which has now become the primary 
obstacle to further peace talks.  Informal discussions by 
Ministers Thapa and Lohani with Maoist negotiators Krishna 
Bahadur Mahara and Ram Bahadur Thapa (a.k.a., Badal) have 
been reasonable; however, Lohani believes they represent the 
minority view among the Maoist leadership.  Lohani also 
reported that the Maoists appeared to believe that the King 
was in agreement on the 5-kilometer restriction on the RNA. 
Lohani stated that not only was the King unaware of the 
demand, but the issue was not even discussed with the RNA. 
¶9.  (C) Lohani reaffirmed that the GoN would continue efforts 
to save the cease-fire and revive peace talks.  He noted, 
however, that all of the concessions, from the code of 
conduct to the two rounds of peace talks have been made by 
the Government.  The GoN has even overlooked massive and 
systematic Maoist violations of the code of conduct in order 
to avoid disruption of the talks.  Lohani expressed the hope 
that the GoN's July 29 response would strengthen moderate 
Maoists to stand up to their more aggressive party cadres. 
Should the Maoists renew violence, Lohani requests strong 
support from the U.S. Government. 
 
Government Releases Maoists from Prison 
======================================== 
 
¶10.  (U) As reported in ref B, the GoN released central 
committee members Mumaram Khanal, Rabindra Shrestha, and 
Bamdev Chetri and student leader and extortionist Gyanendra 
Tripathi (a.k.a. Sanjay Sharma).  Tripathi was arrested two 
weeks ago with hundreds of thousands of rupees in cash from a 
recent Maoist extortion drive.  In a public statement, 
Minister for Information and Communication Thapa highlighted 
that the government has released 1,513 Maoists from jail 
since the beginning of the cease-fire. 
 
Post Comments 
============== 
 
¶11.  (C) Government Response:  The Cabinet's response to the 
Maoists' demands reflects a much more organized and 
nationalistic approach to the negotiations than exhibited by 
the government's previous negotiators in the two rounds of 
peace talks and in the code of conduct agreement.  This more 
professional negotiating style may have altered Maoist 
calculations on the degree to which they can achieve their 
aims through negotiations.  Discussions with key personnel 
today gave a slightly more optimistic assessment of the 
situation than yesterday.  Despite the GoN's efforts over the 
last twenty-four hours to accommodate the Maoists' demands, 
the government is taking steps to respond to a resumption of 
violence. 
 
¶12.  (S/NF) Maoist Safehavens in India:  Continued reports on 
Maoist leadership meetings in India belie repeated assertions 
by the Indian government that they are doing all they can 
(ref G) to deny the Maoists the use of Indian territory. 
Post welcomes the Department's instructions regarding an 
urgent demarche to appropriate and effective levels of the 
Government of India (ref H). 
MALINOWSKI