This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 002231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL GM
SUBJECT: MINISTER-PRESIDENT KOCH'S VISIT TO WASHINGTON MAY 
13-15 
 
REF: FRANKFURT 550 
 
¶1. (SBU) Hesse Minister-President Koch will have an official 
visit Washington May 13-15.  Koch would like to focus on 
international affairs, the U.S.-German relationship, 
potential U.S. military base closings in Germany, Iraq, US- 
EU issues, and counter-terrorism and security issues and 
will be seeking appropriate appointments through official 
channels.  Koch also has an interest in Asia, particularly 
in increasing market access in China for German companies, 
and in the Tibet issue. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Minister-President Koch is a likely challenger for 
chancellor candidate to Christian Democratic Union (CDU) 
chairman Angela Merkel in 2006, and has a strong interest in 
foreign affairs and the United States in particular.  (See 
reftel bio cable on Koch for more details.)  He and his 
party won an absolute majority in Hesse state elections on 
February 2, 2003, increasing his standing and influence in 
the CDU nationally.  The request for the visit has already 
gone through the German Foreign Ministry, which will 
coordinate with the German Embassy.  We believe it is 
important that Koch obtain substantive meetings at the 
highest appropriate level at the Department, on the Hill and 
at the Department of Defense.  Koch announced his visit 
during CDU Chairman Angela Merkel's visit and is in 
competition with Merkel for influence in the CDU.  He will 
likely want a good deal of press attention for his visit. 
Koch may also wish to visit Wisconsin during this trip, 
which has a sister-state relationship with Hesse.  Koch is 
also a personal friend of HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson, whom 
he knows from his days as Governor of Wisconsin. 
 
¶3. (U) Pol/Econ Chief Ruth M. Hall will be point of contact 
at the Consulate for any follow up questions or 
coordination, along with Pol/Econ FSN Specialist Christian 
¶O. Goebel. 
 
¶4. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE