This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL TU CY
SUBJECT: TURKISH MFA PLEASED WITH FREE MOVEMENT OF GREEK 
AND TURKISH CYPRIOTS, PUSHES FOR FURTHER CBMS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) MFA Cyprus DG Ertugrul Apakan summoned EU and US 
reps to discuss the free movement of Greek and Turkish 
Cypriots that began on the island April 23.  Apakan claimed 
that "TRNC President" Denktas has suggested the policy and 
that the GOT had supported it from the beginning.  According 
to Apakan, the current measure allows day-time travel only 
but could be expanded at a later date.  Apakan further noted 
that on April 23, 2268 Turkish Cypriots traveled to the 
south, while 1475 Greek Cypriots traveled north.  (Note: 
these figures were confirmed separately by the Greek 
representative. End note.)  No pattern has been established 
yet, as it appears more Greek than Turkish Cypriots crossed 
earlier on the 24th.  Two gates are now open with a third 
being negotiated.  No major security incidents have occurred, 
Apakan said. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Apakan averred that the Turkish Cypriot 
administration is working on additional measures, including 
"normalization of the flow of goods," as part of a CBM 
package.  Denying that the proposed CBMs are a tactical move, 
Apakan claimed that GOT hopes CBMs will create an atmosphere 
conducive to building trust.  "Turkey wants a win-win." 
Nevertheless, Apakan underscored that no amount of CBMs would 
substitute for a comprehensive settlement.  He carefully 
recited statements and proposals by Denktas in support of UN 
peace initiatives and called on the EU to help as a third 
party to resolve the Cyprus issue. 
PEARSON