This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221002Z Aug 03UNCLAS ABUJA 001434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, DS/IP/AF 
LAGOS FOR RSO 
 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ASEC
SUBJECT:  SUSPICIOUS INCIDENT 
 
 
¶1. On Thursday, August 21, 2003 at approximately 
0330hrs. a vehicle driven at a high rate of speed 
almost ran head on into the local guard force 
vehicle.  As the fast moving vehicle swerved to 
avoid the guard vehicle it ended up on a dead end 
street in front of the Nigeria-Sao Tome & 
Principe Joint Development Authority a quasi- 
diplomatic facility and residence.  The vehicle 
was immediately abandoned by the two occupants 
who fled into the bush.  The vehicle was later 
impounded and towed from the area by the National 
Police. 
 
 
¶2. The incident took place next to the Kingston 
Residential Compound a USG housing compound 
located in the Maitama suburb of Abuja where most 
USG embassy residential compounds are located. 
 
 
¶3. Eyewitness accounts from the local guards 
indicated the vehicle was occupied by what 
appeared to be two Nigerian male nationals and 
that one of them was armed with a rifle. 
 
 
¶4. RSO follow up investigation with the National 
Police determined the vehicle involved was 
stolen.  Apparently, the individuals stole the 
vehicle using a spoon to activate the ignition. 
The National Police advised that after the guards 
reported the incident, the individuals involved 
stole another vehicle they abandoned during a 
high-speed chase. 
 
 
¶5. It is not unusual for incidents such as this to 
take place in Abuja.  The nefarious criminals 
involved are still at large. 
 
 
Roberts