This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001982 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
WHITEHOUSE FOR NSC; SECSTATE FOR AF/W 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NI OPDC PREL
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM PRESIDENT OLUSEGUN OBASANJO TO 
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH 
 
¶1. The Nigerian Presidency has asked that the Embassy forward 
a letter from President Obasanjo to President Bush.  Signed 
original is being forwarded to the White House. 
 
 
¶2. Begin text: 
 
 
November 10, 2003 
 
 
Dear President 
 
 
Appreciation 
 
 
Mr. President, I write on behalf of my delegation and on my 
own behalf to thank you most profoundly for the warm 
reception accorded us during our visit to your office last 
week when we were in the United States.  That you found the 
time in your very busy schedule to meet with us was clear 
evidence of your legendary reputation for openness, 
accommodation, positive leadership and goodwill to all.  The 
depth, quality and frankness of our discussions, especially 
on Nigeria was very encouraging and we are comforted in the 
fact that we can always count on you as a good friend of 
Nigeria. 
 
 
Mr. President, I want to assure you that my people and I hold 
you in very high esteem and we shall continue to do our 
utmost best to strengthen the already excellent relationship 
between Nigeria and the United States.  As you travel around 
the United States and other parts of the world doing good as 
always, please, keep Nigeria in your thoughts and prayers. 
Once again, on behalf of my delegation, I thank you very much 
for receiving and spending quality time with us.  I wish you 
a very successful trip to the gold tournament in South Africa. 
 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
/sgd/ 
 
 
Olusegun Obasanjo 
 
 
End text. 
Meece 
MEECE