This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 003651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/18/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN'S PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION RESULTS: 
INDEPENDENT PRO-GOVERNMENT CANDIDATES WIN LARGE MAJORITY 
 
REF: AMMAN 3612 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) (D) 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) An estimated 1.3 million Jordanians voted in the 
parliamentary elections June 17, out of 2.3 million 
registered voters.  Surprisingly, the Islamic Action Front 
(IAF), the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood, won only 
18 seats, fewer than analysts' predictions of 20-25 seats. 
Results indicate that voter turnout in rural areas and small 
villages was much higher than in Amman.  The  national voter 
turnout was 59 percent, with Karak reporting 82 percent, 
Irbid 68 percent and Amman 45 percent.  No women candidates 
won regular seats, and the winners of the 6 women's seats 
appear to be conservative and tribal.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
VOTER TURNOUT HIGH IN NORTH AND SOUTH, LOWER IN AMMAN 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (C) Official results show that Jordanians in the north and 
south of the country and in rural areas and villages turned 
out in greater numbers to vote than their counterparts in 
Amman.  While an official spokesman described the turnout as 
"relatively good" when compared to 1997's 54 per cent 
participation, turnout did not surpass the levels of the 1993 
and 1989 elections (69 and 62 percent respectively).  The 
lower turnout in the 1997 elections is attributed to the 
IAF's boycott of elections to protest the one man, one vote 
elections law. 
 
--------------- 
IAF PERFORMANCE 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Surprisingly, although many analysts had predicted 
that the IAF would win 20-25 seats, only 18 IAF candidates 
won (including one of the six women's seats--see paragraph 4 
below).  There is speculation that other independent 
candidates may also identify themselves with the IAF once the 
parliament is in session.  The IAF complained that many fully 
veiled women (faces covered except for eyes) had been asked 
to expose their faces to male election officials to verify 
their identities and had chosen not to vote.  (Note: None of 
the 20 observers from various embassies witnessed a fully 
veiled woman choose not to vote). 
 
---------------- 
WOMEN CANDIDATES 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  Despite hope that some of the 54 women candidates would 
win parliamentary seats outright, official results showed 
that none of the winners of regular seats were women.  The 
six seats reserved for women will be filled by two women from 
Tafileh, one from Irbid, one from Karak, one from Madaba, and 
an IAF candidate from Zarqa.  There was deep disappointment 
in Amman that the capital will not have a woman 
representative in parliament.  Analysts expect the six female 
winners will hold conservative beliefs. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5. The official results confirm that the parliament will have 
a substantial pro-government majority.  As mentioned reftel, 
this majority will be tribal, conservative, and pro monarchy 
in its orientation.  That no women won seats outright  and 
that the capital will not have any female representative in 
the parliament has highlighted how far women have yet to go 
to be fully incorporated into Jordanian political life. 
GNEHM