This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS NASSAU 002452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO WHA/CAR DOCONNOR 
STATE PASS TO INL/LP KBROWN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BF SNAR OPBAT
SUBJECT: OPBAT OPERATIVE SEIZED 1159 POUNDS OF COCAINE 
 
¶1. Summary.  On December 8, 2003 charges were filed before a 
Nassau magistrate against three individuals arrested on 
Saturday in connection with the seizure of 1,159.40 pounds of 
cocaine.  The seizure was completed by members of the Royal 
Bahamas Police Force in cooperation with members of the 
Operation Bahamas and Turks and Caicos (OPBAT). End of 
Summary. 
 
¶2. Over the weekend, drug traffickers braved the rough waters 
brought by a neighboring tropical depression to move a large 
cocaine shipment from Haiti to The Bahamas.  Acting on 
intelligence gathered, OPBAT mobilized air, marine and land 
resources to conduct a round the clock surveillance on two 
small vessels believed to be involved in the contraband near 
the Lucayan waterway of the island of Grand Bahama. 
 
¶3. After the crew ran the vessels ashore, the police 
confiscated the cargo and arrested three of the four Bahamian 
nationals crew members The men were charged with possessing 
dangerous drugs with intent to supply.  It is estimated that 
the narcotics have a street value of USD $16 million. 
 
¶4. This significant seizure that attracted the headlines of 
one of Nassau's major newspaper took place in a busy weekend 
that netted, in separate mission, intercepts of 1200 pounds 
of marijuana and a Haitian migrant smuggling boat with more 
than 300 people on board. OPBAT is a multi-nation, 
multi-agency initiative that includes a strong USG 
participation and support and is the largest and longest 
cooperative efforts overseas of any government involved in 
drug enforcement. 
WITAJEWSKI