This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- A lead story in all papers today, May 22, 
highlights America's "strong" warning of potential 
attacks in the near future.  Same story reports the 
arrest of three Moroccans in Saudi Arabia for planning 
to hijack a plane for suicide bombing purposes against 
Saudi targets.  Stories also report on President 
Bush's "intended" visit to the region.  Reports on 
preparations for the Jordanian parliamentary elections 
continue, with the majority of commentaries hoping for 
and expecting transparent and democratic elections. 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "The mass graves!" 
 
Daily columnist Hilmi Al-Asmar, writes on the op-ed 
page of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al- 
Dustour (05/22):  "Finally, we `discovered' mass 
graves in Iraq.  Piles of skeletons and human bones 
are shown on televisions, where bereaved families and 
orphans stand looking, trying to identify their lost 
loved ones.  A heartbreaking scene.  But, Saddam 
Hussein was not the only dictator in the world, and 
mass graves is not an Iraqi invention..  The mass 
graves of Iraq are similarly found in many parts of 
this wretched earth.  No one remembers those others 
and no one mentions `civil rights' and `human rights' 
until these issues have some relationship with serving 
Israel or oil.  And here stands Palestine, a living 
witness to the ugliness of the `world order'." 
GNEHM