This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 000576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, INR/NESA; NSC FOR 
¶E. MILLARD 
 
LONDON FOR POL/RIEDEL 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL: 04-03-13 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PINS PHUM NO JA PINR CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Leading Tamil politicians criticize Tigers in 
courageous, but highly risky move 
 
Refs:  Colombo 551, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador E. Ashley Wills. 
Reasons: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Two key Tamil politicians have 
ramped up their criticism of the Tigers in recent weeks. 
The politicians, V. Anandasangaree and N. Raviraj, 
charge the Tigers with using strong-arm tactics in their 
bid to control the Tamil community in Jaffna.  The 
course the two have chosen is a courageous one, but 
risky, and, as of this point, they seem isolated in 
their public stance.  In the long-term, however, their 
decision to oppose the Tigers could have important 
ramifications for politics in the Tamil community.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
=========================== 
Two MPs take a Public Stand 
=========================== 
 
¶2.  (C) Two key Tamil politicians have ramped up their 
criticism of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) 
in recent weeks.  In highly unusual public remarks for 
Tamils, the two, V. Anandasangaree and N. Raviraj, have 
publicly underscored that they are independent of the 
LTTE and do not have to listen to the group's edicts. 
(Note:  Anandasangaree, 70, is the leader of the Tamil 
United Liberation Front, "TULF," and has been in 
Parliament since 1970.  He is from Jaffna.  Raviraj, 40, 
formerly mayor of Jaffna, represents the 
Chavachchkacheri area in Jaffna for TULF.  He has been 
in Parliament since 2001.) 
 
¶3.  (C) Of the two, Anandasangaree's comments have been 
particularly biting.  Last month, for example, he 
announced publicly that he did not see the LTTE as being 
"the sole representative of the Tamil community." 
(Note:  It is a mantra of the LTTE that it is the "sole 
representative" of the Tamils.)  In February, 
Anandasangaree also faced off against the LTTE, publicly 
complaining about the group's (successful) effort to 
prevent the ceremonial reopening of the Jaffna library. 
(Note:  In preventing the reopening, the LTTE clearly 
did not want Tamil politicians, such as Anandasangaraee, 
to get the credit for the reconstruction of a cultural 
landmark -- See Reftels.) 
 
¶4. (C) In the meantime, Raviraj has also made clear his 
disdain for the LTTE, announcing recently that he was 
seriously considering running as an independent 
candidate for mayor of Jaffna, his former job. 
(Note:  It is possible that long-delayed local elections 
may take place in the north and east in June.)  In 
making this announcement, Raviraj was signaling that he 
wanted out of the Tamil National Alliance (TNA), a loose 
political grouping of Tamil parties which has forged 
very close links with the Tigers since it was formed in 
late 2001. 
 
============================ 
Strong Views in Private, too 
============================ 
 
¶5.  (C) To discuss the developing situation, the 
Ambassador met separately with Anandasangaree on 
March 19 and Raviraj on April 1.  In these meetings, 
both men hit out in very, very harsh terms against the 
LTTE.  One core element of their points was the 
(accurate) claim that LTTE cadre are often using 
intimidation and violence against Tamils in Jaffna. 
While providing few details, both men went on to accuse 
the LTTE of assassinating Tamil opponents in Jaffna and 
elsewhere.  (Note:  Per Reftels,  Mission has picked up 
several reports lately in which LTTE cadre allegedly 
have killed informants working for the security forces 
and other Tamils.  These reports have not been 
confirmed.) 
¶6.  (C) Another aspect of their criticism of the LTTE is 
that the group is showing no respect for the TULF. 
Raviraj remarked that the Tigers seem to believe that 
they have the "complete right" to control Tamil 
politics.  He went on to note to the Ambassador that the 
TULF was the oldest Tamil political party and one of the 
oldest in Sri Lanka, and should be respected by the 
LTTE.  In emotional tones, Raviraj also commented that 
the Tigers should now back off given that the LTTE-GSL 
war was in remission and let politics in the Tamil 
community play out its natural course. 
¶7.  (C) In his comments to the two politicians, the 
Ambassador underlined that he respected their courageous 
views.  The U.S. had never accepted that the Tigers were 
the "sole representative of the Tamil people," and had 
also always argued that the Tamil community in the north 
and east deserved full democratic rights.  The 
Ambassador commented, however, that the two would be 
wise to proceed carefully and judiciously.  Both men 
took the Ambassador's point, adding that they were 
fearful of possible LTTE retribution and had spoken to 
the GSL to request additional security.  As of yet, 
however, they had not been threatened directly by the 
Tigers.  The Ambassador asked both men to contact the 
Mission immediately in case they received any such 
threats.  (Note:  For its part, as is its style, the 
LTTE has not commented publicly on the two men's 
criticisms, though some pro-LTTE elements have harshly 
hit out at them.) 
 
================ 
Isolated, So Far 
================ 
 
¶8.  (C) At this point, Anandasangaree and Raviraj seem 
isolated from the mainstream of Tamil politics, and, as 
of yet, there is no indication that other well-known 
Tamil politicians are about to join them in their anti- 
LTTE stand.  (Note:  There are several former 
paramilitary parties that have historically opposed the 
LTTE.  These groups, though they have some support, are 
not within the general mainstream of Tamil politics.) 
When asked, Anandasangaree admitted that few of the 
other TNA (including TULF) MPs supported his views, 
though he felt that some of them might do so privately. 
 
¶9.  (C) In a sign of the problem the two might have in 
gaining support, N. Sampathan, a TULF MP from 
Trincomalee with historically moderate leanings, has 
given no indication of wanting to join them.  In an 
April 2 meeting with the Ambassador, Sampathan said he 
thought that Anandasangaree was being "too emotional" 
about things and "needed to act his age as a senior 
leader of the party."  Anandasangaree, he added, had 
said some "unfortunate" things about the LTTE over the 
Jaffna library incident.  To clear the air, Sampathan 
recommended that Anandasangaree go to the LTTE- 
controlled Wanni region and discuss his concerns face- 
to-face with the Tiger leadership.  When asked, 
Sampathan discounted the possibility that 
Anandasangaree's life might be under threat from the 
LTTE. 
 
¶10.  (C) Sampathan also maintained a sunny perspective 
regarding the LTTE, in general.  He said he thought the 
group's cadre were reacting well to peace and that they 
were maturing "after years in the jungle."  It would 
take time until the group acted more as a political 
party and less as an insurgent army, but the 
transformation had already begun.  Queried about reports 
of intimidation, Sampathan remarked that the Tigers 
could not be blamed fully for that, as they were 
fighting off the former paramilitary groups, which had 
used strong-arm tactics against other Tamils. 
 
======= 
COMMENT 
======= 
 
¶11.  (C) The course Anandasangaree and Raviraj have 
chosen is a courageous one.  It is also highly risky for 
the two given that several top leaders of TULF have been 
killed by the LTTE in the past.  These assassinations 
include that of TULF leader A. Amirthalingham (killed in 
July 1989) and TULF senior MP N. Thirulchelvam (killed 
July 1999).  It is possible that the ongoing peace 
process might afford the two men some protection in that 
the Tigers might be reluctant to kill high-profile Tamil 
opponents at this time. 
 
¶12.  (C) In the long-term, the decision by the two to 
oppose the Tigers could have important ramifications, 
especially if the ceasefire and peace process continue. 
In the past, when the war was on, many Tamils did not 
want to break community solidarity and criticize the 
group.  In light of the current peaceful situation, 
however, many Tamils are clearly feeling less beholden. 
Although very few Tamils have taken the plunge thus far, 
it is possible that Anandasangaree and Raviraj could be 
at the forefront of a movement that could point Tamil 
politics in a more constructive direction.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶13.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS