This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 001348 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/NGA FOR NATE JENSEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/11/2013 
TAGS: EWWT PREF IZ YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: PROPOSED FERRY SERVICE FROM YEMEN TO IRAQ 
 
REF: CATO/JENSEN TELCON 6/9 
 
Classified By: Charges D'Affaires Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 ( 
d) 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request -- see paragraph 4 
 
¶2.  (U)  On June 8, Saeed Salh Al-Ghalebi, Al-Ghalebi 
Shipping Company Ltd, met with Embassy's Commercial Assistant 
to inquire about the procedures required to establish a ferry 
service from Yemen to Iraq. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Ghalebi estimated that there are between 10,000 - 
12,000 Iraqis in Yemen (many of them teachers on summer 
break) who would like to return to Iraq.  A Turkish-owned 
ship in Dubai is ready to come to Aden (or Hodeidah) and 
pick-up passengers for transport to the port of Umm Qasr, but 
Ghalebi is awaiting additional information from the Embassy 
before proceeding.  Ghalebi would like to organize between 
10-15 trips, and estimates the fee for the ship at USD 2 
million. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Action requested:  Post requests the Department's 
guidance before we respond to Ghalebi on the feasibility of 
his proposed ferry service.  POC for this request is Pol/Econ 
Officer Willeah Cato.  She can be contacted via unclass and 
class e-mail: catowe@state.gov or catowe@state.sgov.gov, 
phone (967) 1 303 - 155 x2155, or fax at (967) 1 303 - 259. 
In addition, please forward this query to the appropriate 
individuals in both OCPA and CENTCOM. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Minimize considered. 
 
 
MISENHEIMER