This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001075 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI MOPS PREL KU
SUBJECT: FLOOD OF SUPPORT FROM KUWAITI POPULATION 
 
¶1.  At 7:45am March 25, Op Center Kuwait received a call from 
a Kuwaiti woman expressing support for our role in the 
military action in Iraq.  She said her call was the result of 
a text message she received on her cell phone telling her to 
call the Embassy to let us know her opinion of the conflict 
(pro or con).  The message also instructed her to forward it 
to all of her friends.  The trickle of calls in the early 
morning soon became a torrent, overwhelming the Embassy 
switchboard, and all lines at the Op Center are now engaged 
non-stop fielding phone calls from message recipients. 
Between 9:30am and 4:30pm, the Embassy received 303 phone 
calls supporting our actions in Iraq from people who received 
the text message, and no/no phone calls opposed to the 
conflict. 
 
¶2.  Post has no idea of the identity or motivation of the 
person who began this message chain.  There is no doubt that 
the phone calls are genuine expressions of support from 
people who feel strongly enough about the issue to take the 
time to call in.  Since the start of the war, even before 
this call-in campaign, our contacts were typically starting 
each phone call with expressions of support. 
JONES