This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191529Z Jun 03UNCLAS ANKARA 003975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT FOR E, EB, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, AND IO 
NSC FOR QUANRUD AND BRYZA 
DEPT PASS USAID FOR OFDA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: TURKEY WAITING FOR RESPONSE TO IRAQ RECONSTRUCTION 
PROPOSALS 
 
 
REF: A) IRAQ RECONSTRUCTION PAPER PROVIDED BY ZIYAL 
     ON JUNE 16 B) ANKARA 3913 C) ANKARA 3832 D) 
     ANKARA 3848 E) ANKARA 3777 
 
 
¶1. This cable contains an action request.  See paras 2 and 4. 
 
 
¶2. Summary and action request:  The GOT has proposed various 
types of Iraq Reconstruction assistance, including:  the 
donation of office supplies, vegetable seeds, and two 
hospitals; the provision of electricity and mobile phone 
lines; reestablishment of civair links; and sending personnel 
to ORHA.  The GOT is waiting for a USG or OCPA response on 
each of these proposals.  Post would appreciate Dept/OCPA's 
guidance on responding to the GOT soonest.  End summary and 
action request. 
 
 
¶3. The GOT has recently made several proposals related to 
Iraq reconstruction and humanitarian assistance for which it 
is waiting a USG/CPA response (refs).  These proposals 
include: 
 
 
-- Provision of office supplies and furniture (ref B):  In 
response to a request from the Iraqi MFA, the GOT is prepared 
to send office supplies to Iraq via Harbur Gate.  The MFA has 
requested OCPA authorization for this shipment, and that U.S. 
authorities in Iraq take appropriate security measures to 
help ensure safe passage of the drivers/trucks transporting 
the supplies. 
 
 
-- Hospitals (ref C):  The GOT has proposed funding 
construction of and equipment for two hospitals in Baghdad 
and Kirkuk, and has asked that the USG advise with which 
entity in Iraq the GOT could pursue this proposal. 
 
 
-- Reestablishing civair links (ref D, E):  The GOT is 
interested in starting flights between Baghdad and Istanbul 
as soon as possible.  Embassy looks forward to Department 
response to ref E, regarding establishing civilian air 
control between Iraq and Turkey. 
 
 
-- Resumes for ORHA personnel:  The GOT has provided several 
resumes of individuals who could be seconded to ORHA, which 
we have forwarded to Department, and is waiting a response. 
 
 
-- Electricity:  Ref A states that the GOT has proposed to 
supply Iraq with 70 MW of electricity.  MFA Coordinator for 
Iraqi Reconstruction Ambassador Okcun clarified to EconCouns 
that this is a commercial offer from a private Turkish 
company.  Okcun requested that we inform the MFA if OCPA is 
interested, and the MFA will coordinate with the company. 
 
 
-- Telecommunications:  Ref A states that the GOT had 
previously proposed to donate a 300-line mobile phone 
switchboard with a satellite connection.  The GOT is waiting 
for a OCPA response to this proposal (note:  we had not seen 
this proposal prior to ref A). 
 
 
-- Harbur Gate:  Ref A proposes that Turkey open a new border 
gate near the Syrian border, which would require construction 
of two bridges over the Tigris and 30 km of new road on the 
Iraqi side of the border.  The GOT requests a U.S. response 
to this proposal. 
 
 
-- Provision of vegetable seeds:  We understand that U/S 
Ziyal raised during his to U/S Grossman June 16 the GOT's 
willingness to send vegetable seeds to relieve the severe 
seed shortage in southern Iraq.  The GOT will need a point of 
contact at OCPA to facilitate this shipment. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Action request:  We would like to respond to the GOT 
as soon as possible regarding their various proposals.  Post 
would appreciate Dept/OCPA's guidance. 
PEARSON