This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 002993 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DS/DSS, DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, S/CT, NEA, 
NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, NEA/P, CA, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER YM EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - 20 DECEMBER 2003 
 
Classified By: Ambassador E.J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (s)  Summary: On December 20 Ambassador convened an EAC 
meeting to discuss Post response to recent security incidents 
involving Westerners.  Post has confirmed that three Western 
males were stabbed in or near the Old City on December 15-17. 
 After reviewing security procedures, the Embassy issued an 
updated warden message cautioning Americans against travel on 
foot around Bab al-Yemen, Tahrir Square, the Bounia 
neighborhood and the areas surrounding the Taj Sheba Hotel, 
Jamal Street and Suq al-Qah.  Subject to ROYG concurrence, 
EAC also agreed to request that RSO arrange security-escorted 
visits for Embassy personnel who wish to visit these areas. 
End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Three Westerners Stabbed in Old City Area 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (s) RSO briefed the EAC on what Post has been able to 
confirm through contacts with other Embassies and the ROYG. 
On December 15 a Dutch national was knifed in Bab al-Yemen. 
On December 16, a German national was stabbed walking from 
the Taj Sheba hotel to al-Tahrir Square.  On December 17, an 
Austrian national was knifed knocking at a door in the 
al-Bunia neighborhood.  RSO also informed the EAC that all 
the men were clearly identified as European and are blond. 
The Austrian national told the Yemen Observer newspaper that 
the attacker muttered something regarding Saddam Hussein. 
 
¶3.  (s) A/DCM relayed information from the German DCM who 
said the Austrian national and the German national have 
described different attackers.  Local news organizations also 
report the German national said he was attacked by two men. 
 
--------------------------- 
ROYG Confirms Two Stabbings 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (s) A/RSO met with Ministry of Interior Chief of Staff 
Sunidar on December 18 who confirmed that a Dutch and a 
German national were stabbed.  CONS issued a warden message 
on December 18 informing the community of two stabbings. 
A/RSO noted that he requested a follow-up meeting with the 
Ministry of Interior (MOI), but this request was denied by 
the MOI, which cited that A/RSO already had met with Sunidar 
that week and that Sunidar was tied up in meetings all day. 
A/RSO will continue to push for an MOI meeting as soon as 
possible.  Ambassador reviewed Warden message distribution 
procedures, noting that many Embassy employees only received 
the annoucement on Saturday morning (December 20) when they 
opened their email.  CONS will investigate alternate weekend 
distribution to American employees. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
New Security Procedures: Escorted Visits to Areas of Concern 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶5.  (s) Ambassador proposed to the EAC that the A/RSO, in 
consultation with the CLO, organize escorted trips to the 
areas of concern.  AID suggested adding Suq al-Qah to the 
areas subject to caution and EAC members concurred.  FPD 
encouraged all Embassy staff to travel in groups.  The EAC 
agreed to issue a Warden message updating members of the 
American community about the third incident.  The message 
also cautions American citizens to be particularly alert and 
to avoid travel on foot around Bab al-Yemen, Tahrir Square, 
the Bounia neighborhood and the areas surrounding the Taj 
Sheba Hotel, Jamal Street and Suq al-Qah.  EAC also agreed to 
reissue guidance encouraging Americans to limit use of public 
transportation to known, reliable operators.  An updated 
Warden message was sent on December 20. 
 
¶6. (u) Ambassador tasked CONS to take the temperature of the 
Warden community and advise if the Ambassador should schedule 
a Warden meeting. 
 
 
HULL