This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2013 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC CVIS EFIN ETRD IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: AMMAN SITREP 37 (4/16 1600 LOCAL) 
 
REF: AMMAN 2321 
 
Classified By: DCM Gregory L. Berry for reasons 1.5 (B)(D). 
 
---------------- 
General Overview 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (C) Embassy staff are allowed greater freedom of movement 
although restrictions are still in place. 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  On April 16 ICRC contacted Embassy to report an 
AMCIT in Baghdad had approached their office there with a 
request that he be returned to the US.  He also requested the 
same assistance for his wife and daughter, who are not 
AMCITS, and he claimed he has filed immigration petitions for 
his wife and daughter in Amman.  We are in the process of 
verification. 
 
---------------------- 
GOJ Actions/Statements 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Nothing new to report. 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶4. (U)  Situation remains stable; no new developments to 
report. 
 
------------------------------- 
Economic and Trade Developments 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Nothing new to report. 
 
--------------------------- 
Refugee/Humanitarian Issues 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) UNHCR reported April 16 that 220 persons currently are 
being held in "no-man's land" at the Jordan-Iraq border.  Six 
Syrians reportedly arrived the night of April 15/16.  In an 
April 16 telcon, the Ambassador urged Minister of State 
Shaher Bak to allow these groups to remain in "no-man's land" 
until an appropriate solution can be found and reminded the 
GOJ of its obligation to grant temporary admission and 
protection  to all legitimate asylum seekers.  He also urged 
the GOJ to allow seven Iraqis and four Palestinians to move 
from "no-man's land" into the Ruweished camps, as had been 
pledged to UNHCR on April 15.  Bak said the GOJ would allow 
the 200-plus Iranians to remain in "no-man's land" until a 
solution could be found and had directed GOJ authorities to 
assist in the construction of additional humanitarian 
infrastructure in "no-man's land."  Bak also promised to look 
into the case of the seven Iraqis and four Palestinians. 
 
¶7. (SBU) IOM reports that increasing numbers of TCNs are 
entering Jordan:  75 on April 15 and 65 by 12:00 pm today. 
Recent TCN arrivals report that Iraqis in Baghdad are 
threatening foreign workers and pressuring them to leave, 
telling them that they were guests of Saddam and no longer 
are welcome in Baghdad.  IOM expects TCN arrivals to increase 
still further and is increasing staff at the border and 
Ruweished. 
 
¶8.  (C) According to PLO Refugee Affairs Rep Mohammed Abu 
Bakr, 60-70 Palestinian families were expelled from their 
homes in Baghdad on April 14.  They reportedly have gathered 
at a park.  It is unclear whether they were expelled by 
returning landlords or for political reasons.  (Long-term 
Palestinian residents of Iraq are viewed by some Iraqis as 
supporters of the Saddam regime and hence are vulnerable to 
political reprisals.)  We have alerted the ICRC of this 
matter. 
----- 
Press 
----- 
 
¶9. (U) Media reaction on Syria-USG "standoff" indicates some 
editorial writers believe the USG is "bluffing." (reftel). 
GNEHM