This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 005006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2013 
TAGS: PREL JO IZ
SUBJECT: AFTERMATH OF ATTACK ON JORDAN'S EMBASSY IN BAGHDAD 
 
Classified by Charge d'Affaires David Hale, for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF) Charge spoke to Prime Minister Abul Ragheb and 
Foreign Minister Muasher on August 7 to convey our 
condolences and sympathies for the losses and injuries 
suffered in the attack on Jordan's Baghdad Embassy.  Both 
stressed in the course of the day their gratitude for U.S. 
and CPA action on the ground to shelter and transport the 
survivors and protect the bombed facility.  Both emphasized 
the importance of continued protection of the building by 
U.S. personnel to prevent looting, which would leave a very 
damaging image in the Arab world.  Similar messages have been 
conveyed from senior GOJ officials via ROAL channels.  Post 
will continue to work with CPA on this issue, including in 
defining an end point when such protection will no longer be 
required. 
 
¶2.  (C) Abul Ragheb and Muasher both asked for a rapid 
investigation to undercover the culprits.  Amman is awash in 
rumors about the origin of the attack.  Rumored culprits 
range from pro-Saddam figures enraged by Jordan's support for 
the coalition, to anti-Saddam figures seeking retribution for 
Jordan's past association and provoked by Jordan's recent 
harboring of Saddam's daughters.  Some commentators have even 
pointed fingers at Ahmad Chalabi, for his alleged 
anti-Jordanian bias.  Soberer security contacts are focusing 
on known terrorist linkages between Jordan and Iraq, with an 
established record of attacks here. 
 
¶3.  (U) SEPTEL reports EAC meeting. 
HALE