This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/AF, DS/DSS/ITA & DS/IP/FPO 
LAGOS FOR RSO 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC NI
SUBJECT: VIOLENT DISTURBANCE IN CENTRAL 
ABUJA 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On 20 February 2003, a GON Federal 
Task Force entered Area 1 of central Abuja 
and attempted to "clean up" the area by 
dismantling numerous illegal/unlicensed 
shops. Violence quickly erupted between the 
unlicensed traders and security forces. 
Tires were set ablaze in the street which 
temporarily blocked traffic and one 
individual was shot and killed by police. An 
angry mob attempted to parade the corpse to 
a nearby police command but was dispersed by 
security forces. The disturbance lasted 
approximately two hours before police 
restored order. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Although this incident was not 
directed against official U.S. personnel, it 
is reported because it occurred only a few 
kilometers from the site of the New Embassy 
Compound (NEC). 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The GON's dismantling of illegal 
and unlicensed shops often spark significant 
disturbances within the capital. 
 
 
JETER