This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T COLOMBO 001016 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O.  12958:  DECL: 06-11-13 
TAGS: CE MV AGMT
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 88  (06-11-03) 
 
Classified by Ambassador E.Ashley Wills, Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
CONTENTS:  MALDIVIAN DIPNOTE RE GUANTANAMO 
-          TWO SUSPECTED TIGERS NABBED IN COLOMBO 
 
MALDIVIAN DIPNOTE RE GUANTANAMO 
------------------------------- 
¶1.  (S) Please see our class email dated 6/10/03 re a 
dipnote received June 10 from the Maldives.  In this 
dipnote, the Maldivian MFA states that it has heard that 
a Maldivian national held at Guantanamo Bay may be 
released soon.  The MFA would like the USG to clarify the 
matter. (Note:  In asking this question, the Maldivian 
MFA clearly wants to know whether to continue to push its 
long-standing request to send a team to interrogate this 
individual.)  Please get back to us with any information 
re this matter ASAP.  Thank you. (POL) 
 
TWO SUSPECTED TIGERS NABBED IN COLOMBO 
-------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (C) FYI: In a matter that is receiving a lot of press 
play here, two suspected LTTE cadre were reportedly 
stopped during a random police check in central Colombo 
on the evening of June 10.  One of the suspects allegedly 
took cyanide to avoid being captured alive and is said to 
be in critical condition at a Colombo hospital.  The 
other suspected cadre is in custody and is being 
questioned. (Note:  It is possible that the suspects may 
be involved in trying to assassinate anti-LTTE Tamils. 
As we have reported, the LTTE has pretty clearly been 
involved in well over a dozen killings that have targeted 
Army informants and Tamil political opponents in recent 
weeks/months.  This may be the first time that LTTE cadre 
involved in these killings have been caught.) (Note:  In 
what may prove to be a related development, two police 
officers were reportedly captured by the LTTE late June 
10 near Batticaloa in the east.   There is speculation 
that the two policemen may be held by the LTTE until some 
sort of exchange is worked out for the two cadre captured 
in Colombo.) (POL) 
 
WILLS