This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101447Z Dec 03UNCLAS ANKARA 007588 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, EUR/PGI, OES/PCI, OES/EGC 
STATE PLEASE PASS EPA (HHUYNH) 
 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TBIO TU
SUBJECT:  TURKEY RATIFIES CLIMATE CHANGE FRAMEWORK 
CONVENTION 
 
 
¶1.  Turkey's parliament, the Grand National Assembly, 
ratified the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCC).  Turkey had delayed ratification, because it 
objected to being included in Annex II of developed 
countries, which would have obligated Turkey to provide 
funds for developing countries.  The law to ratify the 
Convention was published in the Official Gazette on 
10/21/03. 
 
 
¶2.  According to the report of the Parliament's Environment 
Commission, Parliament decided to ratify the UNFCCC, 
thinking that the Convention would have some bearing on 
Turkey's future membership in the EU and that ratification 
would prevent possible international trade restrictions. One 
member stated that ratification would provide significant 
investments to reduce green house gases and would improve 
Turkey's image in the international arena. 
 
 
¶3.  As an OECD member, Turkey agreed to be included as an 
Annex I (developed) country; however, the GOT objected to 
Turkey's inclusion in Annex II, which obligated the richest 
countries to provide financial assistance to the developed 
countries.  In 2001, the seventh meeting of the Conference 
of Parties to UNFCCC (COP 7) agreed to withdraw Turkey from 
Annex II and endorsed a footnote that Turkey should enjoy 
favorable conditions within "common but differentiated 
responsibilities." 
 
 
¶4.  Deputy Undersecretary Mustafa Ozturk of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry will represent Turkey at UNFCCC COP 
9, December 10. 
EDELMAN