This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001358 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/FCMPO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PM JO
SUBJECT: FOREIGN CONSEQUENCE MANAGEMENT RESPONSE 
PREPAREDNESS:  PROPOSED CMST VISIT TO JORDAN 
 
REF: STATE 55082 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy Amman in principle would welcome the 
proposed initial visit of a USG Consequence Management 
Support Team (CMST) to discuss emergency operations execution 
procedures, operational plans, and any other necessary 
preparations with appropriate GOJ officials and Mission 
personnel.  Since the proposed visit is scheduled for the 
very near future (i.e. prior to March 15), we request the 
Department send country clearance request ASAP, as all TDY 
visitors now require M approval due to post's authorized 
departure status. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Names/Titles of Key GOJ CM Contacts 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) 
 
(1) Jordan Armed Forces (JAF) GHQ CM POC: Brigadier General 
Mohammad Al-Zagaili, Director, Military Operations and 
Training Directorate; 
 
(2) Brigadier General Dr. Mohammad Abbadi, Director of Field 
Medicine, Royal Medical Services; 
 
(3) Lieutenant General (Retired) Tahseen Shurdom, Director 
Public Security Directorate (PSD). 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Embassy can arrange meetings with the above listed 
contact, and others they identify, as soon as specific dates 
for the proposed CMST visit are finalized.  Regarding the 
level of support Embassy can provide for this team, the 
Department should note that office space and other technical 
support is in short supply due to the very large numbers of 
TDYers already at post. 
 
 
GNEHM