This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005570 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ECON EAIR GM
SUBJECT: TOP HESSE CDU PLAYERS KOCH AND ROTH TUSSLE 
 
REF: A) 2002 FRANKFURT 11843; B) FRANKFURT 392 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Hesse's two most powerful Christian 
Democratic (CDU) politicians, Hesse's Minister President 
Roland Koch and Frankfurt Lord Mayor Petra Roth have public 
disagreements and competing national ambitions.  Roth was 
elected in May 2003 as president of the German Council of 
Cities.  Koch was reelected in February 2003 as Minister- 
President of Hesse with an absolute majority.  They disagree 
on major issues such as the expansion of Frankfurt airport 
and regional reform.  Though Roth is losing support in the 
Hesse state CDU, she remains very popular in Frankfurt.  Her 
public opposition to Koch's initiatives could create 
problems for the Hesse Minister-President for the remainder 
of his second term.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The media have reported a serious rift between 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch and Frankfurt Lord 
Mayor Petra Roth (both CDU).  The Frankfurter Neue Presse, a 
left-of-center newspaper, quotes CDU politicians' 
description of icy relations between the two influential 
Hesse leaders that date back to Roth's re-election as Mayor 
of Frankfurt two years ago.  Roth had distanced herself from 
Koch, who was then entangled in a party financing scandal. 
Roth denies allegations of tensions, stating that, "There 
are several politicians in Wiesbaden who want to fabricate a 
rift that does not exist."  She does admit that she tends to 
compensate with her outspoken views for what she perceives 
as Frankfurt's insufficient representation in the state 
parliament.  "Frankfurt is Hesse's most important urban 
center," says Roth's assistant, "But we only have twelve 
deputies in state parliament (out of 100).  Frankfurt lacks 
a strong lobby." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Roth and Koch, publicly clash on: 
 
  -    Frankfurt airport expansion.  Koch supports it, Roth 
     rejects the selected variant, because due to the potential 
     increase in noise for residents near Frankfurt; 
-    Regional reform. Roth would like more responsibility 
for a regional (multi-state) body led by Frankfurt to 
facilitate administrative, economic and cultural 
cooperation.  Koch intends to limit Frankfurt's influence; 
-    Privatization of the Frankfurt Trade Fair, a huge 
exhibition center in downtown Frankfurt.  Koch supports 
selling Hesse's 40 percent share.  Roth is against selling 
the city of Frankfurt's 60 percent share. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Since Lord Mayor Petra Roth was elected head of the 
German Council of Cities May 15, 2003, she has been de facto 
Hesse's second most powerful politician.  Roth's 
relationship with the Chairman of the Frankfurt CDU, Udo 
Corts is especially problematic.  Udo Corts is Hesse 
Minister of Higher Education and former state Interior 
Minister.  He is a rising star in Koch's cabinet, and a 
favorite of the Minister-President.  In a meeting with the 
Consul General in June, Corts openly expressed his dislike 
of Roth.  Corts said that Roth is losing support in the 
state CDU due to her reputation for unreliability and open 
resistance to Koch's initiatives.  Corts said not only Koch, 
but other cabinet members, are wondering what Roth's goals 
really are.  Corts also said it was, "far from certain that 
Roth will be re-nominated by the state CDU, if her track 
record does not improve." (Note: Roth was re-elected for a 
six-year term in 2001.) 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment: Koch and Roth are both ambitious 
politicians who have set their sights on national office: 
Koch for Chancellor (2006), Roth for Federal President 
(2004).  Both know that it would be virtually impossible for 
two Hesse politicians to hold these offices at the same time 
and the competition adds to the tension between them. 
(Note: Despite her ambitions, most observers put Roth's 
chances of becoming Federal President at close to zero.) 
Koch's drive to redesign the administrative structure of the 
region is perceived as a threat by Roth and others across 
the Frankfurt political party spectrum.  The tension between 
Hesse's competitive Minister-President Roland Koch and 
Frankfurt's vocal Lord Mayor Petra Roth could make Koch's 
second term more difficult than his absolute majority might 
indicate.  End comment. 
 
BODDE