This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS YEREVAN 003079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON AM
SUBJECT: PARLIAMENT PASSES THE 2004 STATE BUDGET 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
BUDGET PASSED IN THE FINAL DAYS OF THE YEAR 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  The National Assembly passed the final 2004 State 
Budget during a December 25 extraordinary session. 
Following rigorous parliamentary lobbying that resulted 
in AMD 5.5 billion (USD 9.8 million) in additional 
spending over the initial draft, the budget passed by a 
vote of ninety-six to six (with no abstentions).  At 
the same time, the National Assembly also passed a 
package of tax law amendments that the IMF had pushed 
to combat tax evasion. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GOVERNMENT TAKES ON PROPOSALS FROM COALITION PARTNERS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2.  Prime Minister Andranik Markarian noted that this 
budget differs from ones passed in previous years 
because it incorporates proposals both from the 
government and from the coalition partners.  (NOTE: 
Various parliamentary factions submitted an additional 
214 budgetary proposals, of which the government 
adopted 117 during the course of budget negotiations. 
END NOTE.)  According to the Minister of Finance and 
Economy Vardan Khachatrian, the additional expenditures 
will be directed mainly to social and cultural 
programs, education and health care, and social welfare 
transfers were pegged to the economy's growth rate. 
The Orinats Yerkir Party, parliament's second largest 
faction, had been critical of the initial spending 
allocations and of the changes in tax law associated 
with them.  Including the additional spending 
provisions in the final version of the budget, however, 
ultimately softened their position. 
 
------------------- 
PRELIMINARY NUMBERS 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  In the final version of the 2004 budget state 
expenditures are projected at AMD 317 billion (USD 564 
million), down from AMD 334.2 billion last year.  The 
budget projects revenues at AMD 274.1 billion (USD 488 
million), anticipating a 7 percent growth rate, 3 
percent annual inflation and a 16 percent increase in 
tax revenues (on top of growth), all realistic 
assumptions.  The budget thus projects a deficit of AMD 
42.9 billion (USD 7 million) or 2.5 percent of GDP, 90 
percent of which will be financed by World Bank loans 
and soft credits from foreign states. Armenia's total 
debt is projected at AMD 1,180 billion (USD 2 billion), 
or 69 percent of projected GDP. 
 
-------------------------- 
BUDGET LINKED TO GOAM PRSP 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Armenian Prime Minister Andranik Markarian said 
that the 2004 budget was based on concrete strategic 
development programs, by which he is likely referring 
to the Poverty Reduction Strategy Program (PRSP).  As 
outlined in the strategy, the government anticipates 
greater tax revenues and plans to spend more on 
education, health care and social programs next year, 
despite an overall drop in expenditures. 
WALKER