This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T KUWAIT 000613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2013 
TAGS: ETTC MOPS MARR PARM PREL PTER KU
SUBJECT: INPUT TO MANPADS NEA BILATERAL PLANS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 36950 
 
Classified By: (U) AMBASSADOR RICHARD H. JONES; FOR REASON 1.5 (B, D) 
 
¶1. (S) Prior to the Iraqi invasion in 1990, the Kuwaiti Armed 
Forces (KAF) owned SA-7, SA-8, and SA-14 missile systems. 
Since 1991, the Kuwait Ministry of Defense (MOD) has claimed 
that all of their missile inventory was stolen by the Iraqi 
military.  In 1995, the Kuwaiti MOD purchased 48 Starburst 
MANPADS from the United Kingdom.  While Kuwait still 
possesses this inventory, all the missiles are past the 
certification date.  Despite these missiles not performing 
well during the last exercise in March 2002, they are still 
considered capable of bringing down slow moving aircraft. 
 
 
¶2. (S) According to Embassy-Kuwait's DIALO, Kuwait has 
evidenced good control of its Starburst inventories which are 
stored in tightly guarded government and/or military 
warehouses.  At the present time, Kuwait does not export or 
allow the transfer of these weapons systems.  There is a very 
small "black-market" for illicit small and/or light arms in 
Kuwait, but there is no evidence of illicit traffic in the 
larger weapon systems.  Currently, there is no known excess 
inventory of the Starburst MANPADS. 
 
 
¶3. (S) The GOK has, and continues to take, pro-active 
measures against the possibility of a terrorist attack, by 
conventional or non-conventional means, against one of its 
civilian aircraft. 
 
 
¶4. (S) Financial or other incentives are not presently 
necessary to induce the GOK to alter its present command and 
control of its Starburst MANPADS.  As cited previously, the 
GOK is currently handling its advanced weapons systems in a 
safe and secure manner. 
 
 
¶5. (S) Presently, the Kuwaiti Minister of Defense, and 
primary point of contact regarding this issue, is Shaykh 
Jaber Mubarak Al-Sabah.  MOD and other government ministries 
in Kuwait have a long history of providing strong support to 
the USG regarding military matters. 
JONES