This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 007110 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2013 
TAGS: KSPR MARR MCAP MOPS PINS JO
SUBJECT: EIPC FUNDING FOR JORDAN FOR FY 2005 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (S) Jordan, a key supporter of U.S. policies in the Middle 
East, has long been an enthusiastic participant in 
international peacekeeping operations (PKO), including 
service in recent years in Sierra Leone, Ethiopia/Eritrea, 
East Timor, Haiti, and the Balkans.  In addition, Jordan has 
provided valuable assistance to Operation Enduring Freedom in 
Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom.  Because of its deep 
commitment to PKOs, Jordan has established a Peacekeeping 
Operations Training Center (POTC) which trains both Jordanian 
and U.S. forces.  Embassy Amman proposes to support the 
Jordanian POTC with USD 250,000 of EIPC funding for FY 2005. 
End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
POTC: TRAINING FOR U.S. AND JORDANIAN FORCES 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (S) The Jordanian Peacekeeping Operations Training Center 
has trained Jordanian peacekeepers for several years for 
service in Sierra Leone, Ethiopia/Eritrea, Afghanistan, and 
East Timor.  Funding of the POTC's training programs will 
help ensure continued Jordanian participation in 
international peace support operations. 
 
¶3. (S) The POTC is also beginning to play a crucial role in 
preparing U.S. military forces for service in Iraq.  For 
example, during October 2003, the Center trained a total of 
172 officers and senior NCOs from III Corps, 1st Cavalry 
Division--who will be rotating into Iraq in the next few 
months--on cultural awareness and situational sensitivities 
for the Middle East.  The courses were deemed so successful 
that 150 more officers and NCOs are scheduled to rotate 
through the same training in January 2004.  US Army 
commanders from Company to Division level have assessed the 
training as invaluable to future success in Iraq.  This 
training has the full support of the Commander, Central 
Command. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
EMBASSY AMMAN'S EIPC FUNDING RECOMMENDATION 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (S) To further the success of the Jordanian Peacekeeping 
Operations Center, Embassy Amman proposes allocating USD 
250,000 in EIPC funding for Jordan during FY 2005 for 
train-the-trainer instruction for Peacekeeping Center staff. 
The U.S. security assistance (Military Assistance Program - 
MAP) office at Embassy Amman and the Jordanian Armed Forces 
have identified specific courses that would be of particular 
benefit: EIPC Instructors training, Planning Peace 
Operations, Peacekeeping for Decision Makers, Logistics for 
Peacekeeping and Specialized English Training for 
Peacekeeping. 
 
¶5. (S) The increasing USG interest in utilizing the Jordanian 
Peacekeeping Center trainers makes EIPC funding essential to 
ensure that this instruction remains available.  We 
anticipate that U.S. military units will continue to rotate 
to Jordan or bring Jordanian trainers to the United States. 
It makes sense that we assist in the training of Jordanian 
Peacekeeping Center staff who will be training our units to 
do their jobs in Iraq. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (S) Jordan is a close ally providing key support to U.S. 
objectives in the Middle East, including assisting in 
building a stable and secure Iraq and playing a valuable role 
in the Middle East peace process.  Jordan's commitment to 
democratic values, economic liberalization, human rights, 
stable government and civilian control of the military make 
it a model for the region. 
 
¶7. Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Please visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov/p/nea/amman/ or access the site through 
the Department of State's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM