This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 006734 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RPM, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2013 
TAGS: PREL TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA WAITING FOR U.S. VIEWS ON ISTANBUL SUMMIT 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (U)  The is an action request; see para 5. 
 
 
 
 
Searching for NATO Summit Themes 
================================ 
 
 
¶2. (C) Pol-Mil Counselor and PolMilOff met with MFA DDG for 
NATO Affairs Sanivar Kizildeli October 24 and discussed 
Turkey's vision for the NATO Istanbul Summit.  Kizildeli 
noted the GOT hoped to have "as many meetings as possible" 
(i.e. with non-NATO entities) during the Summit, but 
acknowledged that, particularly for a NATO-EU meeting, 
serious content was necessary.  Kizildeli thought an 
important theme for the Summit, given that 2004 was a US 
election year, would be reiterating the importance of the 
trans-Atlantic partnership.  Other important issues were 
expanding NATO cooperation with Adriatic Charter countries, 
the Caucasus, and Central Asia; and NATO involvement in 
Afghanistan and Iraq.  Kizildeli noted that, because nothing 
could happen without US support, "everyone was waiting for 
the US to put something on the table."  Kizildeli requested a 
preview of U/S Grossman's points at NATO on November 4 in 
order for the GOT to have time to absorb them. 
 
 
Robertson Seeks Mor Turkish Troops for Afghanistan 
============================================= ===== 
 
 
¶3. (C) Kizildeli said the Summit had not been a major point 
of discussion during SYG Robertson's visit to Ankara the day 
before, although Robertson apparently agreed that a NATO-EU 
meeting was critical.  He also supported discussing 
challenges such as terrorism and WMD. 
 
 
¶4. (C) According to Kizildeli, Robertson also asked Turkey 
for 1,000 more troops for Afghanistan.  MFA agreed that 
Turkey was not contributing enough, but the Turkish military 
faced two problems a) lack of resources due to its costly 
transformation and the economic crisis, and b) a legal system 
that requires Parliamentary approval for deploying troops 
abroad and limits the troops activities once they are 
deployed.  Kizildeli said the GOT was working on both these 
legal and financial issues in order that the GOT might 
increase its contribution to peacekeeping activities more 
easily; but it would take time.  A civilian contribution (e.g 
PRTs) might be more likely as TGS simply could not spare 
anyone more for Afghanistan while a troops deployment to Iraq 
remained a possibility. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Action Request: The Turks are strong at detailed 
planning but weaker on vision.  Any insight we can give them 
on the US goals/vision for the Summit would give them 
something of a head start.  Embassy Ankara would appreciate 
the opportunity to preview with the GOT U/S Grossman's points 
prior to the November 4 meeting. 
EDELMAN