This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006772 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Turkish Republic Celebrates 80th Anniversary - All Papers 
Gen.Ozkok: "President Sezer Does What's Right" - Hurriyet 
Sezer: "I Will Not Allow A Move Against Secularism" - 
Milliyet 
EU urges Turkey to Implement Reforms Fully - Milliyet 
Only 10 AKP Deputies Attend Presidential Reception - Turkiye 
US Congressional Delegation: "US Needs Turkish Troops in 
Iraq" - Milliyet (10/29) 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Military Negotiations With US Halted - Cumhuriyet 
Third Summit For Iraq Will be in Damascus-Cumhuriyet 
Peshmerges to take Responsibility for Kirkuk Security - Yeni 
Safak 
US Congressmen's Praise Did Not Satisfy Turkey - Radikal 
(10/29) 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
80th Birthday of the Turkish Republic:  All papers and TV 
channels gave extensive coverage to celebrations held to 
mark the 80th anniversary of the Turkish Republic.  Papers 
feature photos of celebration ceremonies from all over the 
country.  Eyes turned to the Presidential Palace for the 
most controversial event of the day.  Papers report that 
while virtually all CHP deputies attended the President's 
Republic Day reception, only 16 ministers and 2 other 
parliamentary deputies from the AKP were present. 
"Hurriyet" draws attention to messages by President Sezer, 
PM Erdogan and TGS chief General Ozkok.  During the 
reception, Sezer noted that this was not his personal 
reception, but rather a reception of the state.  Sezer 
claimed that recently there have been moves against 
secularism, and vowed that he would never allow concessions 
on this issue.  General Ozkok said that the President 
"always does the right thing," but declined to comment on 
the invitation controversy.  PM Erdogan said that he did not 
want tension, and pledged that his party would continue its 
duties while suffering silently. 
 
 
EU Entry:  Today's papers give details about the enlargement 
report of the EU commission about Turkey to be released on 
November 5.  The Commission reportedly will urge Turkey not 
to leave the reforms on paper, but to begin implementing 
them in full.  The report draws attention to problems in 
Kurdish language broadcasting and education, as well as the 
difficulties still faced by religious minorities.  The 
report also cautions Turkey on the influence of the military 
in politics, and on the Cyprus issue.  "Milliyet", however, 
characterizes this year's report as more moderate and 
objective than the previous EU reports.  The draft will be 
discussed today for the final time, and will be debated by 
the 20 members of the EU commission on November 3.  It will 
be announced by Commissioner Verheugen on November 5. 
 
 
FM Gul Comments on Troop Deployment in Iraq:  Wednesday's 
papers give extensive coverage to FM Gul's comments on the 
possible troop deployment in Iraq.  Gul blamed the US for 
problems related to the troop deployment.  Wednesday's 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that FM Gul responded to claims that 
the Iraqi interim government will try to oust Turkish forces 
from Northern Iraq.  Gul stressed that Turkey has not 
received any such message from the interim government on the 
issue.  Nevertheless, he said, Turkish forces will remain in 
Iraq as long as terrorism in the region remains threat for 
Turkey. 
 
 
US Congressmen Visit Turkey:  Wednesday's "Milliyet" reports 
that US Congressmen Edward Royce and Thomas Lantos met with 
FM Gul on Tuesday.  The congressmen stressed that Turkish 
troops are needed in Iraq, and he disavowed Bremer's 
comments referring to the Ottoman Empire as an occupying 
power.  "Radikal" says that despite the praise by the 
congressmen, a high-level Turkish Foreign Ministry official 
said that `these people are politicians whose job it is to 
make good politics.  They might affect some people with 
their words, but what is important for us are the policies 
of the US Administration.' 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"A confused America is upsetting" 
Cuneyt Ulsever observed in the mass appeal Hurriyet (10/30): 
"The current confusion in Iraq indicates that the US will 
either have to withdraw from Iraq in disgrace, or will 
reluctantly reach an agreement with Shiite leaders, 
Baathists, Kurdish tribes and the PKK/KADEK. .  All these 
groups regard Turkey as a clear, potential danger to 
themselves and the region.  There is no doubt that all will 
be biding their time, looking to cause trouble for Turkey. 
The PKK/KADEK will definitely grab such an opportunity.  If 
the UN decides to intervene in this confusion, then the 
occupying countries will attempt to share the benefits of 
Iraq's economy, to the exclusion of Turkey." 
 
 
"For Cyprus, it's the Annan Plan or nothing" 
Mehmet Ali Birand commented in the mass appeal Posta 
(10/30):  "The only way out for the Turkish Cypriots will be 
to sign the Annan Plan with some slight changes.  Otherwise, 
they will be facing EU regulations that envisage the free 
circulation of people and commodities on the island.  Cyprus 
will then be represented and administered by the Greek 
Cypriots alone. .  The Annan Plan provides an opportunity to 
the Turks for self-rule, and grants them sovereignty on 
their land. .  No substantial changes can be made to the 
Annan Plan, for the Greek Cypriots will play for time and 
propose several changes for each change requested by the 
Turks.  They will resistance until May 2004 and thereby win 
the game. .  If Turkey recognizes the Annan Plan in 
principle, withdraws 20,000 troops from Cyprus, and takes 
concrete steps forward on Nicosia Airport, Famagusta and 
Varosha by May 2004, the EU might give more time for a final 
agreement on Cyprus even if the Greek Cypriots become a full 
EU member. .  It would be useful for Turkey to reconsider 
the Annan Plan." 
 
 
EDELMAN