This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

080652Z Oct 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 002464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USAID/ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM SOCI YM MEPI DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT: A/S BURNS IN YEMEN:  MEPI AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS 
SHOWING RESULTS 
 
 
¶1. (u) Summary:  During his October 3-4 visit to Yemen, 
Assistant Secretary Burns experienced first-hand how 
development programs complement and support Post's 
counter-terrorism goals.  Meetings with President Saleh and 
FM Qirbi reported in septels.  A/S Burns received 
comprehensive briefings from the Embassy development team 
(USAID, Pol/Econ, Public Diplomacy, Agriculture) in 
preparation for on-site visits.  At the Supreme Committee for 
Elections and Referenda, the Chairman and MEPI-funded 
implementors NDI and IFES discussed the close cooperation 
that resulted in a forty percent increase in women's voter 
registration, excellent election day administration and the 
most peaceful election ever despite some acknowledged flaws. 
Burns visited a local NGO train-the-trainers workshop for the 
MEPI-funded project to eradicate women's illiteracy.  He also 
saw the Sailah municipal drainage project in central Sanaa 
that provides improved flood control and sanitation. 
American Institute for Yemen Studies (AIYS) briefed the A/S 
on the plans for the new MEPI-funded building that will 
increase cultural and academic exchanges and understanding 
between Yemen and the U.S.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Embassy Sanaa Development Team -- Practical Focus on 
the Most Troubled Governorates 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  (u)  Embassy Sanaa's Development Team briefed A/S Burns 
on Post's efforts to effectively tap all available funding 
(AID, MEPI, monetized food aid) and expertise to create 
complementary and effective USG programs.  USAID highlighted 
the team's strategy for both short-term high-impact projects 
and long-term development in four main sectors -- health, 
education, private sector development (primarily through 
agriculture) and democracy and governance.  Health programs 
in Marib were highlighted to illustrate the team's emphasis 
on fostering development primarily in five remote and tribal 
governorates where services and government control are 
lacking, an important complement to Post's counter-terrorism 
goals. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
MEPI/Elections 2003: 
Excellent Cooperation between SCER, NDI, IFES 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (u) The Supreme Committee for Elections and Referenda 
(SCER) hosted A/S Burns, the National Democratic Institute 
(NDI) and the International Foundation for Electoral Systems 
(IFES) for a discussion on the April 2003 parliamentary 
elections and MEPI-funded assistance.  SCER Chairman Khalid 
Ash Sharif welcomed A/S Burns and thanked him for the 
assistance provided through the Middle East Partnership 
Initiative (MEPI) to NDI and IFES, which he praised as 
instrumental to the success of the election.  Ash Sharif 
detailed the technical preparations for voter registration 
and election day, showing materials such as IFES-assisted 
voter registration books that helped increase women's 
registration by 40% -- making women 42% of the electorate. 
He noted vital NDI's role; agreeing with NDI Director Robin 
Madrid that the cooperation helped the SCER act as a bridge 
between government and the opposition parties to alleviate 
suspicion and dampen the potential for violence. 
 
¶4. (u) A/S Burns said it was important for the United States 
to support Yemen's goals in economic development and 
democratic reform through partnership.  He noted that "Yemen 
was out ahead of other societies in the region on many 
democratic reforms" but that there were "more challenges on 
the road ahead."  Burns said the U.S. was proud to have found 
practical ways to encourage democratic reform through NDI and 
IFES and pledged to seek more resources through MEPI and 
other avenues to continue providing support.  Ash Sharif 
welcomed continued cooperation, noting that the current and 
future programs outlined by NDI and IFES Director Enrique 
Saltos during the meeting would be very important to Yemen's 
continued democratic development. 
 
---------------------- 
Eradicating Illiteracy 
---------------------- 
 
¶5.  (u)  A/S Burns visited SOUL's (Women and Children's 
Development Association) two U.S.-sponsored workshops.  As 
part of the $2 million MEPI-funded eradication of women's 
illiteracy project implemented by CARE, SOUL hosted a 
train-the-trainers workshop for CARE workers to conduct 
baseline surveys and assessments.  CARE contracted SOUL to 
conduct evaluation and training for the project, which is 
designed to provide basic education to women who have been 
left behind by the educational system.  A/S Burns was also 
briefed on SOUL's training of local NGO capacity, which was 
funded through Democracy Small Grants. 
 
-------------- 
Sailah Project 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (u) During transits between meetings, A/S Burns was shown 
the Sailah municipal drainage and flood control project, 
funded primarily via more than $15 million dollars of USG 
monetized food aid assistance over the last several years. 
The Sailah project is a channel through central Sana'a that 
has been instrumental in controlling flooding and the flow of 
water during the rainy season.  It has drastically improved 
the health and sanitation situation in the city. 
 
------------------------------------ 
American Institute for Yemen Studies 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (u) A/S Burns met with American Institute for Yemen 
Studies (AIYS) Director Chris Edens to discuss support for 
on-going research and fellowships, renovations of cultural 
sites, and efforts to increase U.S.-Yemen understanding 
through the exchange of research and ideas.  The A/S and 
Edens discussed AIYS's ability, as a non-governmental entity 
separate from the U.S. Embassy, to engage in non-traditional 
diplomacy efforts.  AIYS has been forced to move to six 
different locations over the past 25 years.  It currently has 
$500,000 in MEPI funding to purchase a building and compound 
for its offices and hostel facilities.  Both the A/S and 
Edens agreed that having a permanent location would provide 
the security and infrastructure for AIYS to expand its 
capacity to promote interests beyond economic development and 
culture. 
 
------------------------- 
Burns Meets Embassy Staff 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. (u) A/S Burns spoke to all Embassy staff about U.S.-Yemen 
cooperation on security and development, Iraq and the 
Israeli-Palestinian situation.  The Ambassador hosted an 
in-house barbecue that provided an excellent opportunity for 
the Embassy's junior officers to meet A/S Burns. 
 
¶9. (u) This cable was cleared by NEA A/S Burns. 
HULL