This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS NL UNGA
SUBJECT: URGENT DEMARCHE REQUEST: UN ACTION ON THE MIDDLE 
EAST 
 
REF: SECSTATE 268287 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Mary E. Daly for reasons 1.5 (b and 
d) 
 
Â¶1. (C) PolOff delivered reftel demarche on the emergency 
special session of the General Assembly on the Middle East to 
Dutch MFA Head of Political and Legal Affairs Division Pieter 
Ramaer and Deputy Head of Middle East Division Mark 
Singleton.  The Dutch will follow the EU line, but do not yet 
know the EU decision.  Ramaer said they do not expect a 
decision today, and any negotiation on the text of the 
resolution will probably extend through the weekend.  He 
noted the G-77 will most likely support the Palestinian 
resolution.  The Dutch want a united EU stance, and will try 
to avoid a split vote in the General Assembly.  Singleton 
noted that the Dutch support the U.S. call for clear 
condemnation of terrorism, and are happy the U.S. has taken a 
clear position on Israel's decision to remove Arafat. 
Singleton stressed the need for unity among Quartet members, 
and underlined the importance of the upcoming Quartet meeting 
September 25. 
SOBEL