This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 007005 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
PLEASE PASS TO EUR/ACE KLIGERMAN 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KSEI KWMN PHUM SMIG TU ZL
SUBJECT: TURKEY:  SOUTHEAST EUROPEAN PROSECUTORS WORKING 
GROUP PARTICIPATION 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 289393 
     ¶B. STATE 302659 
     ¶C. STATE 306482 
 
 
¶1. (U) As part of Embassy Ankara's ongoing efforts to focus 
GOT officials on trafficking in persons (TIP), we discussed 
the talking points contained in reftels A, B and C, and 
particularly the agenda described in reftel B, with Head of 
Illegal Migration Hayati Soysal.  A member of the GOT's 
National Task Force to Combat Trafficking, Soysal is the 
MFA's designated representative regarding this issue. 
 
 
¶2.  (U) Soysal is not aware that the GOT MOJ (Ministry of 
Justice) received an invitation to attend the December 11-12 
meeting in SaM (Serbia and Montenegro), but confirmed that he 
would send copies of the talking points to the MOJ.  Although 
acknowledging the importance of this meeting to Turkey's TIP 
efforts, Soysal said end of year GOT fiscal constraints would 
likely prevent Turkey from sending a prosecutor to this 
meeting.  He was certain that an Embassy notetaker would be 
present at the meeting.  Soysal noted the National Task Force 
does not have its own budget, but relies on the willingness 
of Task Force members from various ministries to support its 
programs. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) We will continue to encourage GOT officials to name a 
prosecutor who is able to attend the December 11-12 meeting 
in SaM before EUR/ACE's November 18 deadline. 
EDELMAN