This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID - DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: KUWAIT SITREP NO. 58 
 
REF: KUWAIT 01474 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 58 AS OF 1800 HOURS LOCAL, 1100 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME APRIL 17, 2003. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP (all reported times are 
Kuwait Local, GMT plus three): 
 
----------------- 
Security/Military 
----------------- 
 
NTSR 
 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
 
NSTR 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
 
AMCIT Janeil Hantuli reported a sexual harassment 
incident that occurred outside her home this morning 
involving a Kuwaiti male.  Ms. Hantuli informed Watch 
Officer that she and her husband contacted the police and 
will press charges against the Kuwaiti male involved in 
the incident with the Fintas Police Department.  The 
Kuwaiti male is now in police custody.  Watch Officer 
provided Ms. Hantuli with a List of Attorneys in Kuwait 
in the event that she wished to seek legal counsel in the 
matter. 
 
AMCIT Tie Sosnowski of Futura Media arrived at Kuwait 
International Airport this morning without a Kuwaiti visa 
or local sponsor.  Watch Officer informed Mr. Sosnowski 
that the U.S. Embassy was not/not Mr. Sosnowski's sponsor 
and that Kuwaiti immigration authorities must make the 
determination as to whether or not to issue Mr. Sosnowski 
a visa at the airport.  The Kuwaiti Immigration official 
on duty at the airport asked Watch Officer if the U.S. 
Embassy could provide a letter requesting issuance of a 
visa for the AMCIT.  Watch Officer explained to Kuwaiti 
immigration official that the U.S. Embassy could not/not 
provide such a letter. 
 
AMCIT Wauleed Khalid Sultan Al-Essa requested issuance of 
an emergency replacement passport for urgent travel to 
Saudi Arabia with his terminally ill AMCIT son.  His son 
was scheduled to undergo emergency treatment in Riyadh. 
Mr. Al-Essa claimed he lost his previous U.S. passport at 
home.  Watch Officer informed Mr. Al-Essa of U.S. 
passport application requirements, faxed him the relevant 
passport application forms and suggested that he come to 
the Consular Section to apply today (weekend) since it 
was an emergency situation.  Mr. Al-Essa subsequently 
found his previous U.S. passport and informed Ops Center. 
 
NBC News Kuwait Office requested information about 
whether U.S. Representative Chris Shay (CT) was still in 
Kuwait on an official visit.  Watch Officer contacted POL 
Officer, who informed Watch Officer that Rep. Shay had 
already departed Kuwait.  Watch Officer provided this 
information to NBC News Kuwait Office. 
 
French national Keren Lentschner of Le Figaro in Paris 
requested a 10-15 minute telephone interview with 
Ambassador Margaret Tutweiler, former U.S. Ambassador to 
Morocco, to discuss her new role in Iraqi reconstruction. 
Watch Officer referred her to ORHA at the Hilton Hotel 
and suggested she contact ORHA directly regarding her 
interview request. 
 
AMCIT Joe Stewart, a civilian contractor working for the 
U.S. military in Kuwait, requested information on future 
USAID infrastructure programs in Iraq.  Watch Officer 
referred Mr. Stewart to appropriate contact in Kuwait and 
suggested he also consult the USAID web-site for more 
information on specific USAID programs and activities in 
Iraq. 
 
Embassy Istanbul informed Ops Center that an AMCIT seaman 
would be arriving in Kuwait next week and would be 
requesting an emergency replacement passport for urgent 
onward travel.  Watch Officer noted the name and details 
of the AMCIT seaman for the Consular Section. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
NTSR 
 
-------------- 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
 
NTSR 
 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: N/A. 
 
JONES