This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 006620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA -- MMILLS/ADEMOPULOS AND IRAQ TASKFORCE 
USDOC 4520/ITA/MAC/ONE/PTHANOS 
USDOC FOR IRAQ TASKFORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID BEXP JO IZ
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN PARTICIPATION IN MADRID MEETINGS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 287995 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: A high-level Jordanian interagency 
delegation to Madrid, led by Finance Minister Michel Marto, 
will make a presentation highlighting Jordan's potential to 
provide technical and training support for rebuilding Iraq's 
institutions and to support other donors' efforts.  While 
planning for the donors meetings seems on track, the 
Jordanians are confused about how to organize themselves for 
the private sector conference.  We will work with the Spanish 
embassy to clear up misunderstandings over ministerial 
participation, the number of Jordanian companies invited, and 
who will pay for their travel, but would also appreciate 
Washington guidance on these points.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------- 
Donors Meetings 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ministry of Planning Secretary General Hala 
Bsiso-Lattouf told ECON/C October 15 that Jordan will send an 
eight-person delegation to the October 23-24 donors meetings. 
 Finance Minister Michel Marto will lead a team including 
Bsiso-Lattouf, Jordan's Ambassador to Spain, Mohammed 
Al-Mu'ajdeh of the Jordanian military's Crisis Management 
Center, Arwa Salaita from the Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
Ismail Zagal from the Ministry of Finance, Nabil Shukm of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and an as-yet-unidentified 
representative of the Public Security Directorate. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Bsiso-Lattouf said Jordan's presentation and 
contribution to the conference will focus on Jordanian 
technical and training support for Iraqi institutions, such 
as training for police, aviation officials, bankers, and 
health inspectors.  In addition to ongoing programs Jordan 
will stand ready to provide additional technical support in 
other areas identified by Iraq.  While Jordan, as an ODA 
recipient, is not in a position to pledge cash, the 
delegation will also highlight Jordan's readiness to support 
other donors' efforts and to provide logistical and other 
support to ensure easy access to Iraq.  Jordan's presentation 
will note the country's strong interest in Iraq's successful 
transition to peace and prosperity, and its readiness to 
cooperate fully with Iraqi institutions and the international 
community. 
 
------------------------- 
Private Sector Conference 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Confusion about the private-sector development 
conference (Reftel) in Madrid has meant that GOJ has not as 
yet put together a delegation for that conference. 
Bsiso-Lattouf said that when she contacted the Spanish 
embassy to follow-up on Minister Rato's invitation, she was 
told that the conference would be open to an undetermined 
delegation of several businessmen, led by the Minister of 
Planning, all of whose travel to Madrid would be paid for. 
She was later told that five businessmen could attend, but 
that the Minister's travel would not be paid for.  We 
conveyed our understanding based on reftel (which we had 
previously conveyed to the Prime Minister and Planning 
Minister Awadallah) that the conference is meant for private 
sector leaders vice government ministers, whose primary role 
would be to recruit and organize the delegation, and 
encouraged her to act quickly to form a delegation. 
Bsiso-Lattouf said she would consult Awadallah (who is 
currently traveling with the King), and that the Ministry was 
ready to form a business delegation even on short notice if 
these questions could be resolved. 
 
---------------------------- 
COMMENT AND GUIDANCE REQUEST 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Jordanian planning for the donors meetings seems on 
track.  We will continue to work with Bsiso-Lattouf and the 
Spanish embassy to encourage appropriate participation in the 
private sector meeting.  We would appreciate any guidance on 
the role of Minister Awadallah at the business conference, as 
well as the availability of funding for private-sector 
delegations to this portion of the conference. 
GNEHM