This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          JUNE 06, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for June 06, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2.  Cumhuriyet: Egitim-Sen (Teachers' Union) 
members in Diyarbakir lived through a difficult 
period for twelve years because of applications 
during the State of Emergency Rule. Twenty-seven 
union members fell victim to mysterious killings 
while one hundred ninety six others were deported 
from the region. Egitim-Sen's Diyarbakir Chapter 
is going to prepare a report on the problems its 
members and administrators faced during this 
time. 
 
 
¶3.  Turkiye: It is reported that PKK/KADEK has 
decreased the number of its militants in camps in 
Northern Iraq as a precaution against a likely US 
operation against the PKK/KADEK in the region. 
The militants have been scattered from their 
winter camps to a more expanded area in smaller 
groups. It is claimed that the terrorist 
organization has instructed one hundred fifty 
militants in Northern Iraq to infiltrate into 
Turkey from the borders with Iraq, Syria, and 
Iran; and the ones in Turkey have been told to 
move to new bases in rural Bingol and Agri 
provinces. Because it is afraid that the Repent 
Law under consideration would encourage the 
militants to desert from and expedite the 
dissolution in the organization, PKK/KADEK 
instructed its militants it would never abandon 
arms. 
 
 
¶4.  Evrensel: Youth and Women Organizations of 
DEHAP in Diyarbakir, Sanliurfa, Siirt, Adana, and 
Batman provinces announced that the Repent Law on 
the country's agenda would deepen the problems, 
and emphasized, instead, a general amnesty, which 
would install peace and order in society, should 
be declared. The security officials in Batman did 
not allow the women's organization to make a 
press announcement in front of DEHAP's provincial 
office. 
 
 
¶5.  Evrensel: One hundred thirty families evicted 
from Yesilgoz village in Sirnak a number of years 
ago have not been allowed to return to the 
village; they have been kept at the entrance to 
Beytussebab for twenty days on the grounds that 
the village road is closed. The governor had 
earlier given the villagers permission to return 
to their village. A prominent villager, 
Abdurrahman Aslan, said Sirnak Governor, Vehbi 
Avuc, initially told him the reason the villagers 
have been kept in Beytussebab was because there 
was no fuel to open the village road. He said the 
governor later stated Aslan had not obtained his 
permission to return and he would not give such 
permission. When the AK Party district chairman 
suggested his party would buy fuel to open the 
village road if the governor granted permission, 
the governor scolded the party leader not to 
speak nonsense. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DVELOPMENTS 
¶6.  Milliyet: Welding works of the pipes that 
will carry the Caspian oil via Baku-Tiblisi- 
Ceyhan route started at the exit terminal at 
Botas in Ceyhan. One million barrels of oil will 
be pumped from one thousand seven hundred sixty 
kilometer-long pipeline daily. Turkey will charge 
up to USD 250 million annual transition fee for 
the first 16 years and up to USD 400 million for 
years 16 to 40. 
HOLTZ