This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS USAID 
COMMERCE FOR 4520/ITA/MAC/ONE/COBERG 
TREASURY FOR MILLS AND CHANG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EFIN IZ JO
SUBJECT: GOJ HOPES JORDAN CAN BE BASE FOR BAGHDAD 
PROCUREMENTS 
 
REF: AMMAN 106 
 
This is an action message; see para 4. 
 
¶1.  (sbu)  Jordanian Trade Minister Salah al Bashir asked the 
Ambassador in a meeting on March 12 what requirements would 
need to be met to allow USG agencies making procurements in 
Iraq after a government change to procure goods and/or 
services from Jordan (such as waivers of "buy America" 
contracting provisions).  Bashir noted that Jordan has a 
number of regional competitive advantages in several sectors, 
and would be a natural fit for procurement for Iraq, owing to 
the close historical ties between Jordan and Iraq.  He noted 
further that, particularly in the services sector, Jordanians 
were already employed throughout the region - as engineers, 
architects, IT specialists, teachers, and medical staff. 
 
¶2.  (sbu)  As examples of the types of goods and services 
Jordan could provide, Bashir passed to the Ambassador a list 
of goods produced for export in Jordan (also available on the 
GOJ's Department of Statistics Website: www.dos.gov.jo) and a 
list of key service sector exports, including:  medical 
tourism; architectural and engineering consultancy; legal 
services; teaching/education; audit and accountancy services; 
software engineers/computer technicians; contract research 
organizations (testing for pharmaceuticals); contracting 
services; land transportation; and management consultancy. 
(Note:  The embassy previously passed to Department reftel 
list of Jordan's exports to Iraq for the past three years, 
which may be a better gauge of immediate export potential. 
End note.) 
 
¶3.  (sbu)  Comment:  Iraq is a natural trading partner for 
Jordan, and Jordan does, as the Minister pointed out, have an 
excellent regional track record in the export of certain 
services.  Jordanian contractors are currently reliable 
supporters of  U.S. government activities in Jordan.  Jordan 
is also an FTA partner, a front-line supporter of our 
counter-terrorism program, and a key ally on many regional 
policies.  To the extent that USG sourcing from Jordan was 
possible, any such business would not only benefit both 
countries at a technical level, but would likely more quickly 
develop normal commercial relations between the two countries 
and help the Iraqi private sector get back on its feet.  It 
would also signal out continued commitment to Jordan's 
economic future. 
 
¶4.  (sbu)  Action Request:  Embassy would appreciate 
Washington guidance regarding what possibilities exist for 
procurement from Jordan.  What rules govern such procurement? 
 How could we accommodate Jordan's request? 
GNEHM