This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 003172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM JO
SUBJECT: KING ABDULLAH'S MAY 26 NATIONAL DAY ADDRESS 
FOCUSES ON UPCOMING ELECTIONS 
 
REF: FBIS GMP20030525000102 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) King Abdullah devoted most of his May 26 National 
Day address to preparations for the upcoming Parliamentary 
elections scheduled for June 17, only giving "hot button" 
regional issues such as Palestine and Iraq scant mention at 
the conclusion of his remarks. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Political Development -- the Message from on High 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The bulk of the King's May 26 address to the nation 
focused on the theme of "political development" and the 
responsibilities of all Jordanians to ensure that the 
upcoming June 17 Parliamentary elections "promote our 
democratic march."  The King stated "the time has come to 
intensify our efforts in order to accelerate the political 
development process, reinvigorate the role of political 
parties, and continue to preserve public freedoms . . . 
alongside economic and social development." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Turning more directly to the upcoming campaign, the 
King called on "every brother and sister in this nation, to 
perform their duties, and to practice their rights in 
participating in these elections."  He then listed a set of 
personal characteristics that voters should look for in 
making their selection: "The capable representative  . . . 
should be in possession of a certain measure of science, 
knowledge and awareness, and integrity and genuine belonging 
to this nation, one who places national interests above all 
others, whether personal, partisan or factional.  I have full 
confidence in your perception that is never fooled by 
glittering mottos, ideologies or ideas that have been 
outdated and proven failures." 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Only Passing Mention of Palestine and Iraq 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Only at the conclusion of his remarks did the King 
make direct reference to regional issues, noting that "Jordan 
has been and will remain, Allah willing, devoted to its Arab 
nation . . . in the forefront of which is the Palestinian 
cause.  Based on this we will continue to support our 
Palestinian brethren in their stance regarding the "roadmap," 
that shall lead to the establishment of their independent 
Palestinian state, on Palestinian soil.  As for Iraq, we will 
do our utmost to ensure its territorial integrity . . . 
sovereignty over their lands, their right to choose their own 
independent leadership and future." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (C) A sampling of Embassy contacts noted that the most 
notable aspect of the King's address was his almost complete 
focus on political development, compared to previous messages 
which centered more on economic and social issues.  Virtually 
all welcomed the King's emphasis on encouraging political 
participation and democratization.  That said, however, many 
also commented that few Jordanians paid much attention to 
this address.  Instead, the talk in coffee shops and around 
dinner tables this week was not of abstract notions of 
political development, but rather about news of a more 
concrete nature: that the government intends to raise prices 
on many staple goods in the days ahead. 
 
 
GNEHM