This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JULY 25, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Powell says U.S. asked for Turkish troops for Iraq - 
Hurriyet 
U.S. growing impatient - Milliyet 
Saddam's men retaliate; three U.S. troops are killed - 
Sabah 
U.S. official thinks Uday committed suicide - Sabah 
Powell to Ankara: Hurry up! - Turkiye 
Wolfowitz admits U.S. did `stupid things' in Iraq - 
Turkiye 
Gul: Turkish troops to Iraq in exchange for Iraqi 
contracts - Vatan 
Demining attempt by Denktas - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
U.S. steps up Iraq pressure on Turkey - Cumhuriyet 
Washington doesn't want delay in Turkish decision for 
Iraqi peacekeeping - Zaman Powell proposes NATO 
umbrella for Turkish troops - Yeni Safak 
Bremer welcomes Turkish troops for Iraq - Radikal 
`Last' photos of Uday, Qusay - Zaman 
U.S. Congress says intelligence failure led to 9/11 - 
Zaman 
U.S. House blocks media monopoly bill - Radikal 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
FM Gul in U.S.: In a joint press conference with 
Foreign Minister Gul, Secretary of State Powell urged 
Ankara to send troops for Iraqi peacekeeping.  Powell 
said that the U.S. request for troops was conveyed to 
Ankara by CENTCOM Chairman General Abizaid last week. 
Gul said it would be easier for Turkey to deploy troops 
to Iraq under a NATO umbrella.  Secretary Powell also 
asked for Ankara's support for the UN-sponsored Cyprus 
peace plan, and added that an $8.5 billion loan for 
Turkey would be released following the completion of 
the IMF's fifth review.  Dailies report U.S. 
Administration officials as saying that Turkish troops 
could be deployed in any part of Iraq except in the 
north.  Commentaries believe Ankara has demanded a 
considerable share in Iraq's rebuilding in exchange for 
a Turkish military contribution to Iraqi security.  Gul 
has also demanded a role in the central administration 
in Baghdad, mainly to prevent a prospective Kurdish 
state in Northern Iraq.  Powell has given Gul the 
message that the U.S. will not bargain over the issue, 
and will not meet the cost of any troop deployment. 
Dailies report that U.S. officials are uncomfortable 
about Turkish efforts to create the impression that the 
Americans first raised the issue of a Turkish troop 
deployment. 
 
 
Turkey, U.S. cooperation against PKK: Foreign Minister 
Gul told the parliamentary foreign affairs committee 
that the U.S. has been positive about cooperation with 
Turkey against the PKK/KADEK presence in Northern Iraq. 
The two allies will launch a joint military operation 
against terrorists who don't lay down their arms in 
light of the forthcoming repentance law now before the 
Turkish parliament.  The decision to carry out a joint 
operation against the terrorist presence in the region 
was taken during CENTCOM Chairman General Abizaid's 
visit to Ankara last week. 
 
 
Cyprus: In a letter to the UN Secretary General Annan, 
Turkish Cypriot leader Denktas offered to help clear 
landmines deployed near Nicosia.  Denktas said such a 
move would enhance mutual trust.  Greek Cypriot leader 
Papadopoulos welcomed the offer, dailies report. 
 
 
Banking watchdog warns Uzans: Turkey's banking 
watchdog, the Banking Regulatory Board (BDDK), has 
accused the Uzan family of mafia activities and tax 
evasion.  The BDDK said that the Uzan group must pay 
its debts to account holders of Imarbank before being 
considered eligible to buy PETKIM, Turkey's state-owned 
petrochemical industry.  Imarbank, owned by the Uzans, 
was recently taken over by the BDDK because of illicit 
money transfers to the Uzan family's other companies. 
In the meantime, the Uzan group was the top bidder 
($605 million) in the PETKIM privatization tender. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq/Foreign troops commitments 
 
 
"Why is it so difficult?" 
Ferai Tinc observed in mass appeal Hurriyet (7/25): 
"The Turkish government still continues its vague 
stance that it has adopted since the early stages of 
the Iraq operation.  The request for foreign troops to 
Iraq became public knowledge over a month ago, yet the 
government is still confused and indecisive instead of 
formulating a concrete policy on this very important 
issue. . Sending our troops to Iraq requires a serious 
decision.  That decision must be made.  Turkey should 
either insist on taking action only within an 
international framework, which I believe is the right 
thing to do, or agree to send its troops to Iraq as a 
police force for the occupation.  Both options require 
a decision, but we do not see the government making a 
case for any of the options.  Instead, it is busy 
trying to bargain." 
 
 
"Partnership for shame" 
Mehmet Ocaktan argued in the Islamist-intellectual Yeni 
Safak (7/25): "What is the justification for Turkish 
soldiers going to serve in Iraq, where the people of 
Iraq are struggling for their salvation.  It would be 
the most shameful act by Turkey if a Turkish military 
presence is designed to help the murderous gang which 
takes instructions from the two liars, Bush and Blair. 
. Nobody should dare to throw Turkey into a new 
adventure on the pretext of improving Turkish-American 
relations.  If Turkey takes any step to please the 
occupying force in Iraq, it will not only harm its 
image in the international community, but will also 
lose its credibility under international law. . The 
occupation forces of the US and the UK should leave 
Iraq and let the UN decide on what to do next.  Turkey 
should then take its place within the peacekeeping 
force under the UN." 
 
 
DEUTSCH