This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 004689 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL JO UNGA UNOMIG
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE TO GOJ ON 58TH UNGA, GOJ UNGA DELEGATION, 
UNOMIG RENEWAL 
 
REF: A. STATE 209189 
     ¶B. STATE 206381 
     ¶C. STATE 184648 
     ¶D. AMMAN 4041 
 
------ 
UNOMIG 
------ 
 
¶1.  Per ref A, Pol Intern discussed renewal of UNOMIG mandate 
with Ayman al-Ameri, second assistant and consultant to the 
director of the MFA,s Office of International Organizations 
Department, on 24 July.  Al-Ameri made no substantive 
comment, but took note of Syria,s decision to follow P-5 
consensus on this issue. 
 
------------------- 
USG UNGA Priorities 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  Pol Intern presented al-Ameri with ref B talking points 
for U.S. initiatives for the 58th UN General Assembly. 
Al-Ameri mentioned that he had seen our earlier UNGA 
priorities points.  Again, al-Ameri expressed appreciation 
for the document but offered no substantive comment on it 
otherwise. 
 
------------------- 
GOJ UNGA Delegation 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  Pol Intern asked Al-Ameri if new information was 
available regarding GOJ's participation in the upcoming UNGA 
session (ref C and D).  He said a decision on the make-up of 
his country's delegation would likely be made three weeks 
before the start of the session, but likely to accompany FM 
Mu asher would be:  Dr. Mousa Braizat, director, 
International Organizations Department; Ali al-Ayad, 
director, Foreign Ministry's Private Office; and, Muhammad 
Hassan, personal assistant to the Foreign Minister.  Also 
likely to attend are a number of new recruits and young 
diplomats.  Al-Ameri said he would not be surprised if the 
delegation remained in NY until October 3.  As to whether or 
not King Abdullah would attend, al-Ameri said he had not yet 
heard anything about this. 
GNEHM