This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 002908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DS/DSS, DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, S/CT, NEA, 
NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, NEA/P, CA, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER YM EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - 9 DECEMBER 2003 
 
Classified By: DCM Alan G. Misenheimer, for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary: The DCM convened an EAC meeting on 
December 9, 2003, to review security conditions for Embassy 
personnel and the general American community in light of a 
recent news article reporting that Yemeni al-Qaeda has 
threatened attacks in the next 48 hours.  The EAC commenced 
with a brief synopsis of the article by the DCM and the 
degree of credibility attributed to the article by the ORCA 
Chief.  As the published threat was assessed to be (a) of 
uncertain validity, at best, and (b) directed against the 
Republic of Yemen Government (ROYG), not U.S. interests in 
Yemen, the EAC decided a new warden message is unnecessary. 
Key offices and personnel represented included: DCM, 
POL/ECON, MO, CONS, PD, ORCA, DAO, OMC, FPD, MSG and RSO. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  The DCM briefed EAC members on the 12/08/2003 BBC 
report citing that Yemeni al-Qaeda has threatened a response 
directed at the ROYG in the next 48 hours in retribution for 
the host government's failed attempt to arrest Abdallah 
Al-Qar'am (NFI).  ORCA Chief explained that none of the 
players named in the article is known, adding that the source 
of the BBC's information was a website whose credibility was 
uncertain, at best. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Based on ORCA's assessment and the article's 
specific language of targeting ROYG elements, the EAC decided 
that issuance of a new warden message is unwarranted at this 
time.  DCM emphasized to EAC members the need to alert RSO if 
new information arises. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Concomitantly, RSO raised the issue of the 
currently heightened regional threat to expatriate housing 
compounds, and the pending request to MOI for an additional 
lane closure on Haddah Road in front of Haddah compound.  DCM 
reiterated that these threats are generalized, not Yemen 
specific.  It was agreed that DCM and RSO would raise the 
issue in pending meeting with the Interior Minister's Office 
Director. 
 
RSO comment: MOI representative assured RSO on 11/25/2003 
that he would raise the Embassy's concern at the next ROYG 
Security Council meeting.  End comment. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Finally, RSO suggested center-massing Embassy 
employee apartments within Haddah compound as new leasing 
contracts become available.  Acting Consul added that the 
Consular Section has recently generated a list of all Amcits 
residing in the compound, including addresses and passport 
numbers. 
HULL