This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 006766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/22/2013 
TAGS: EAID BEXP PREL ETRD IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN NOT TO SEND MINISTERIAL LEVEL REP TO MADRID 
BECAUSE OF GOVERNMENT CHANGE 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 6728 
     ¶B. AMMAN 6620 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Bassam Awadallah, the immediate past and likely 
future Minister of Planning, told the Ambassador October 22 
that Jordan would be unable to send a ministerial 
representative to the Madrid Iraq Donors Conference.  With 
the resignation of the Jordanian PM and government October 22 
(ref a and septel - notal), there are neither ministers to 
send nor a government to send them.  The new government is 
expected to be sworn in on Saturday, October 25.  As a 
consequence, Awadallah said that neither he nor outgoing 
Finance Minister Michel Marto (who was tapped to go to Madrid 
- ref b) would attend.  Instead, he said, Planning Ministry 
Secretary General Hala Bsiso-Lattouf would represent Jordan 
 
SIPDIS 
at the donors conference along with representatives of the 
Foreign Ministry and Ministry of Trade (as reported 
previously). 
 
¶2.  (C)  Awadallah also said that, due to the short notice 
and previous commitments of business leaders, the GOJ had 
been unable to organize Jordanian private sector 
participation in the parallel private sector conference in 
Madrid.  He said that Bsiso-Lattouf would "drop by" the 
private sector conference at some point. 
 
¶3.  (U)  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM