This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR EUR/WE, NP/ECNP, AND EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2013 
TAGS: OPDC PREL ETTC KSTC PARM TU
SUBJECT: WASSENAAR: TURKEY WILL SUPPORT JOINT STATEMENT ON 
MANPADS 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 330283 
     ¶B. STATE 325046 
 
 
¶1.  (C) PolMilOff delivered ref A letter and joint statement 
to MFA Disarmament Head of Department Bulent Meric along with 
Italian DCM Gianni Piccato December 4.  Meric said the GOT 
had received the joint statement earlier from its mission in 
Vienna, had decided to support the statement, and had already 
sent instructions to its mission to convey FM Gul's support 
for the statement. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) As a country that had suffered fatalities as a result 
of PKK use of MANPADS against GOT aircraft, Meric said Turkey 
was very supportive of more stringent regulation of MANPADS 
export and use.  Nevertheless, Meric noted that the Turkish 
military had some "difficulties" with the working paper being 
discussed in Vienna.  For example, TGS believed the 
provisions for exporting countries controlling the use of 
MANPADS by recipient countries were too restrictive and 
impractical.  He noted specifically the requirement to 
separate part of the MANPADS and store them separately.  TGS 
did support, however, holding exporting countries and 
companies responsible if their MANPADS fell into the hands of 
illegal entities. When PolMilOff noted the contradiction 
between less control by exporters but more accountability, 
Meric emphasized that this was TGS's position.  He dismissed 
the problem by saying that the negotiators in Vienna would 
work it out. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Comment: As it chafes during the annual Stinger 
inspections conducted by the US, particularly those in 
northern Cyprus, TGS's belief that exporters should have less 
control over the storage and use of MANPADS is not 
surprising.  Given Meric's comment that this was only TGS's 
position and would be worked out in Vienna, Embassy expects 
the Turks will let consensus form and carry the weight of 
overriding TGS. 
EDELMAN