This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT ASEC PTER SNAR CASC CA
SUBJECT: HALIFAX PORT AUTHORITY SEES SECURITY AS JOB ONE 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED -- PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Halifax Port Authority officials stressed 
to Ambassador Cellucci during his recent visit that security has 
been and will continue to be a top priority at the port, whether 
for containers or for cruise ships and their -- mainly American 
-- passengers.  HPA is interested in participating in "Operation 
Safe Commerce."  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)   Ambassador and Consul General met October 10 with 
the chairman and senior executives of the Halifax Port Authority 
to receive a briefing on port operations and to see at first 
hand how the port is addressing security issues.  Chairman Al 
Abraham and CEO Karen Oldfield stressed that as its business 
grows the HPA sees security -- for containers as well as for 
cruise ships and their passengers -- as a top priority.  VP for 
Marketing Patricia McDermott noted that the port had been 
successful in attracting new shipping business -- total 
containerized cargo was up over 10% from last year -- as well as 
cruise ship visits, which have more than doubled in five years. 
Most of th passengers are Americans. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  VP for Operations and Security George Malec said that 
the port's focus on security predated September 11, 2001.  Well 
before that time the HPA had a contract with the Halifax 
Regional Municipality to provide police services for the port, 
an arrangement that Malec characterized as unique.  As a result 
of the HPA/HRM agreement, the port has immediate access to the 
full resources of the Halifax police department.  The port also 
coordinates security with Canadian federal government entities 
including the RCMP. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  All of the HPA officials stressed their interest in 
ensuring that any U.S. concerns about security at the port were 
resolved promptly.  "We want you to feel comfortable" about the 
port, Abraham said.  Malec said that the HPA welcomed the 
presence of U.S. officials to implement the Container Security 
Initiative, and that the VACIS system was operating well. 
Oldfield noted that about 5% of containers coming through 
Halifax were physically screened, a rate she contrasted to 
competitor Montreal's level of about 3%.  Oldfield also said 
that the port wanted to be involved in Operation Safe Commerce 
(OSC) if at all possible. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  The port's management team is impressive, 
and certainly seems dedicated to addressing any concerns that 
the USG might have about security issues.  HPA's willingness to 
participate in port security initiatives such as OSC could prove 
useful as we move U.S.-based innovations abroad.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HILL