This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS, EB/TRA AND EUR/SE 
ROME FOR FAA 
PARIS FOR TSA 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER EAIR TU
SUBJECT:  New Turkish Airport Security Measures 
 
 
¶1. (U) Turgay Sahan, of the Turkish National Police' 
Aviation Department, provided the Embassy with a copy of 
new security procedures introduced at airports as of 
November 14.  An informal translation of the procedures 
follows below: 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Informal Translation Airport Security 
Procedures: 
 
 
Following the additional security measures at European 
airports, Al Qaeda started believing that the 
possibility of a successful attack with explosives and 
guns was reduced.  The terrorist organization is now 
searching for new arms to conduct such terrorist 
attacks.  The organization may use cameras as pacifiers, 
make technical changes in cameras to hide explosives, 
use toys to hide these explosives, or use Swiss army 
knives, model knives or shoes to conduct these attacks. 
The terrorists may use the flash unit of the camera to 
pacify the crew and use this as a tool to take over the 
control of the aircraft.  The organization is known to 
be searching for ways to hide hand-made explosives in 
the cameras.  They aim to insert the parts and the 
necessary mechanisms for these explosives in the cameras 
to be able to pass the security screening without any 
problem.  There are indications that they could also 
insert nitroglucose explosives in fur toys. 
 
 
Although most airline companies and airports have strict 
measures against passengers' carrying knives with them 
on the aircraft, the terrorists are known to be still 
considering this as an option and to be testing the 
security at the check points through hiding these knives 
in their hand baggage. 
 
 
It is known that these tests are carried out by the 
people traveling for business not directly related with 
Al Qaeda, although the organization has also appointed 
certain people to conduct this search at the airports 
and on aircraft. 
 
 
Based on the local evaluation we made: 
 
 
1) Since there is a possibility that a weakness in cargo 
terminals could be used for a possible attack, 
 
 
-- All the related establishments and organizations in 
the National Civil Aviation Security Program (NCASP) , 
and specifically those at Istanbul Ataturk Airport and 
the ones listed in this Airport's security code should 
act line with their responsibilities, or they will be 
subject to NCASP sanctions. 
 
 
-- The packages as well as the vehicles entering and 
exiting cargo buildings should be strictly controlled, 
entry into cargo buildings should be limited, all 
entities functioning in the cargo buildings should be 
reminded of their responsibilities and obligations, the 
security measures at parking lots for these cargo 
buildings should be increased and the suspicious 
vehicles should be examined, the vehicles should be 
asked to transport passengers without parking in front 
of these buildings. 
 
 
2) In order to avoid any security weakness in the 
periphery, 
 
 
-- all related organizations should examine the physical 
measures to take, including measures regarding the human 
factor, 
 
 
-- the security units around the airport should take the 
responsibility for the security of the areas outside the 
airport, the areas which enable access to the airport 
from the highways or the sea, 
 
 
-- the various gates on the fence surrounding the 
airport should be closed, as long as it does not effect 
the normal functioning of the airport, 
 
 
3) A teamwork should be established at the airport, and 
everybody should be more sensitive about entry-exit 
controls, on informing all the personnel working at the 
airport on the necessity of the security measures, and 
particularly on displaying ID cards. 
 
 
4) The airports which have a closed circuit TV (CCTV) 
system should display the notices and announcements in 
the CCTV rooms, the others should establish a news 
center at the airport and display these announcements. 
These centers will also be used to transfer messages on 
suspicious cases to TNP and the State Airports Authority 
(DHMI) through a standard telephone number. 
 
 
5) Considering how serious of a threat we are facing 
nowadays, a Security Commission should be established 
which will work efficiently to inform the personnel at 
the airports and the communication network previously 
established in line with the NCASP should be used to 
provide a fast solution to the problems that may arise. 
 
 
End Informal Translation. 
Edelman