This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOE FOR PRICE 
 
E.0. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG NL
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY FORUM: MAY 22-24 MEETING IN 
AMSTERDAM 
 
 
Â¶1.  As current chairman of the IEF, the Netherlands has 
announced the following preliminary program for the 2004 IEF 
that will take place May 22-24, 2004 at the Okura Hotel in 
Amsterdam.  The Dutch have also noted the launch of the IEF 
website at www.iefs.net 
 
Begin Text of Preliminary Program 
 
May 22 
 
After the official opening, this session will set the scene. 
The Forum will look back on the events that have taken place 
since the last IEF in Osaka, including the establishment of 
the new IEF Secretariat. An energy outlook for the coming 
decades will be presented. This will deal with such 
questions as: How far will energy demand grow? In what 
sectors and in which countries? How will the growing energy 
demand be accommodated? This session will present the 
background and take a kaleidoscopic view of the items to be 
discussed during the Forum. Experts from the IEA and OPEC 
will assist the Forum by giving their views and pointing out 
critical issues. 
 
Mat 23, First Session 
 
The focal point of this session will be the perspective from 
the oil and gas market and on co-operation between 
governments and the oil and gas energy sector. The gas 
market is growing very fast. Most studies project a 
continuing growth in the coming decades. However, question 
is whether the growth of the gas market is a self-fulfilling 
prophecy. Demand could be lower than projected because of 
competition of other fuels (e.g. coal, supply could be lower 
if the level of investments in transport capacity is 
inadequate.  Other issues for discussion are the 
similarities and differences in institutional arrangements 
between oil and gas. Here a discussion will take place about 
the question whether the co-operation between governments 
and energy companies in oil and gas differ and if so, 
whether these differences may persist or disappear in the 
future. Aim of the discussion is again to explore the need 
for government policies in this field. 
 
May 23, Second Session 
 
The focus will then shift to the core issue of the IEF: 
investments in exploration, production and transport of 
energy. The investments in energy have to grow substantially 
in order to meet the growing demand of oil, gas, electricity 
and other energy sources all over the world. Question is 
whether this increase in investments will be large enough 
and take place in time. Specific obstacles could prevent the 
mobilization of capital for these investments, and thus 
result in shortages and volatile prices. In this session the 
participants will discuss how to overcome the obstacles for 
higher investments. Background papers written by experts 
with experience in the energy industry and the financial 
sector will stimulate discussion. In this session energy 
technology and the environment will also be an important 
issue for discussion. For environmental reasons investing in 
energy efficient techniques are beneficial, even for 
producing countries, because it reduces domestic energy 
demand, leaving room for exports.  Finally, there will be 
room for discussion on the relation between energy access (2 
billion people do not have proper access to energy) and 
economic development and about ways to improve access. 
 
May 24 
The fourth and final session will simultaneously constitute 
a conclusion and a fresh start. The future of the IEF will 
be discussed against the background of the discussions in 
the previous sessions. Next there will be a discussion on 
data transparency and the progress made in the Joint Data 
Initiative. The fourth session will also signal the start of 
the new Secretariat of the IEF. The Secretary General of the 
IEFS, Mr Arne Walther, will present the Secretariat and its 
planned activities. The secretariat will play an important 
role in the preparation of following editions of the IEF. 
 
End Text of Preliminary Program 
 
Sobel