This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 000963 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/03/2013 
TAGS: PARM KNNP ENRG IR CA IAEA
SUBJECT: CANADA TO RAISE IRAN CONCERNS - AGAIN - WITH 
EL-BARADEI 
 
REF: STATE 79477 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) In response to Under Secretary Bolton's request, 
Canada will make reftel demarche to IAEA Director General 
El-Baradei as soon as possible through the Canadian Head of 
Mission in Vienna.  Terry Wood, Foreign Affairs Deputy 
Director for Non-Proliferation, told us that the more Canada 
learns about the Iranian nuclear program the greater its 
concern.  He said that Canada will also stress the threat 
this poses to the IAEA's credibility.  Indications that 
El-Baradei is prepared to take a "flexible approach," as an 
enticement for Iran to do the right thing, are disturbing. 
Iran, Wood continued, cannot be held to a lower standard than 
Canada and other IAEA members, who must comply to the letter 
with their safeguards agreements. 
 
¶2. (C) Wood said that after El-Baradei's visit to Iran, the 
IAEA Secretariat briefed the Canadian Mission on February 27. 
 The Canadian Head of Mission met with El-Baradei later that 
day to express Canadian concerns about the results of the 
visit, and made a "firm" statement on Iran at the IAEA Board 
of Governors meeting in March.  Canada was subsequently 
approached by the U.S. and the UK about convening an informal 
group of IAEA members to address the Iran situation.  The 
Canadian Head of Mission will be hosting a meeting on April 
10 to assess interest in such a group.  If there is 
sufficient interest, then this will be another occasion to 
meet with El-Baradei. 
 
¶3. (U) Wood also confirmed that Jim Wright, Foreign Affairs 
Assistant Deputy Minister for Global and Security Policy, 
will be in Paris April 7-8 for the G-8 Senior Officials 
meeting. 
CELLUCCI