This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID - DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: KUWAIT SITREP NO. 45 
 
REF: KUWAIT 1341 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 45 AS OF 1800 HOURS LOCAL, 1100 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME APRIL 10, 2003. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP (all reported times are 
Kuwait Local, GMT plus three): 
 
----------------- 
Security/Military 
----------------- 
Several Kuwaitis called to express thanks for the 
Coalition's liberation of Iraq; several also sent 
bouquets. 
 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
Notified DCM of a telephone call from the Spanish Embassy 
concerning the death earlier in the week of a Spanish 
journalist at the Palestine Hotel in Baghdad; the 
journalist was killed during a confrontation between 
Coalition forces and snipers.  DCM is following up. 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
A representative of a subcontractor for an American 
construction firm in Ahmadi called to report the death of 
an Amcit employee involved in a single-car traffic 
accident this morning near the Iraqi border; another 
passenger, a fellow Amcit employee, was not seriously 
injured. Embassy Kuwait offered assistance with dealing 
with this matter, however the representative declined and 
stated the company would handle the situation.  At his 
request, a consular checklist detailing procedural issues 
concerning an Amcit death was faxed to the subcontracting 
firm. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
NSTR 
 
-------------- 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
Received several telephone calls from media groups, an 
Iraqi citizen residing in Kuwait and Embassy Rome and 
Embassy New Delhi officials concerning media travel to 
Iraq; the appropriate Coalition Press Information Center 
(CPIC) contact numbers were provided to these callers. 
 
An Embassy Amman officer telephoned seeking Office of 
Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) contact 
numbers; the appropriate information was provided. 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: N/A. 
 
JONES