This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121402Z May 03UNCLAS ANKARA 003085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL IO TU UN
SUBJECT: GOT REQUEST FOR USG SUPPORT FOR CANDIDACY IN 
INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA 
 
 
¶1.  ACTION REQUEST - PARA 4. 
 
 
¶2.  Embassy received MFA diplomatic note no. 2003/UKGY/178657 
dated May 5 requesting USG support for its candidate to the 
International Tribunal for Rwanda at the United Nations 
General Assembly in June 2003 in New York.  The body of the 
diplomatic note is as follows: 
 
 
¶3. BEGIN TEXT: 
 
 
Turkey has contributed to the strenghtening of international 
criminal law also through its support for the establishment 
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former 
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.  The nomination of a Turkish candidate 
for election as ad-litem judge to the International Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda, further demonstrates Turkey's commitment 
to the development of international humanitarian and criminal 
law. 
 
 
Mr. Aydin Sefa Akay, whose curriculum vitae is attached 
herewith, is presently Legal Counsellor of the Permanent 
Representation of Turkey to the Council of Europe.  He served 
as Reporter of the Special Committee on the Charter of the 
United Nations and the Strengthening of the Role of the 
Organization in 1992 and also as a member of the Appeals 
Council for the UN Administer Tribunal between 1991-1992. 
Mr. Akay has represented Turkey in several international 
conferences, including Rio Conference on environmental 
matters, Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee (AALCC) 
and Deputy Minister's Committee of the Council of Europe. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
would therefore highly appreciate the valuable support of the 
Government of the United States of America, for election of 
Mr. Aydin Sefa Akay, as an ad-litem Judge to the 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the 
said-elections.  END TEXT 
 
 
¶4.  Post requests Department guidance for Embassy's response 
by May 16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PEARSON