This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ETRD ETTC IZ JO
SUBJECT: TRAVEL TO IRAQ FROM JORDAN 2: RATES RISE FOR HACC 
FLIGHT 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 5890 
     ¶B. AMMAN 6064 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In the interim prior to the creation of a 
logistics center to assist USG personnel transiting Jordan en 
route to Iraq (ref A), the Embassy wishes to supply the 
Department and all other interested USG personnel with 
information on current options for travel from Jordan to 
Iraq.  This is the first update of the Embassy's cable 
presenting all travel options to Baghdad; the information 
herein supersedes the information given in all prior cables. 
Notable changes of the past two weeks include an increase in 
ticket rates, an additional Sunday flight, and an expansion 
of categories of authorized travelers for the RJ/HACC charter 
flight, a tightening of the categories of authorized 
travelers for the AirServ flight, and a reduction in UNHAS 
flights into Iraq.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) There are currently three different ways to travel 
from Amman to Baghdad by air.  All three leave from Marka 
Airport, located in downtown Amman, about 25 miles from Queen 
Alia International Airport. 
 
--------------- 
RJ/HACC CHARTER 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Center (HACC) 
in Amman, in partnership with Royal Jordanian Airlines 
initiated a charter flight from Amman to Baghdad on August 
¶18.  A 48-seat airplane departs Marka Airport at 0830 and 
arrives in Baghdad at 1130 on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, 
Wednesdays, and Fridays.  Return flights depart Baghdad at 
1330 and arrive in Amman by 1530 on those same days.  On 
October 16, the service will begin regular Thursday flights. 
This flight is available for two categories of travelers. DOD 
and CPA personnel, diplomatic personnel of the U.S. and 
coalition governments, and officials of Iraqi ministries will 
be charged USD 125 one-way and USD 200 round-trip and will 
receive first priority in the booking of the flight. 
Authorized USAID, CPA, and DOD contractors, personnel from 
the UN and humanitarian organizations, and non-coalition 
diplomats will have secondary priority in bookings and will 
be charged USD 425 one-way and USD 800 round-trip for the 
flight.  USAID personnel will be given third priority in 
bookings, and will pay USD 165 one-way and USD 330 
round-trip.  Finally, other passengers (primarily accredited 
journalists) may be authorized to travel by HACC based upon 
special circumstances.  These will be given last priority and 
will pay USD 600 one-way and USD 1100 round-trip.  These 
rates represent an increase from previous levels, but will 
likely soon be decreased if insurance companies agree to 
remove a supplemental risk premium. 
 
¶4. (U) All passengers are limited to 20 kilos of baggage and 
will be charged USD 5 per kilo for excess baggage.  In 
Baghdad, private contractor CusterBattles offers a USD 25 
land transport service in conjunction with flight arrival and 
departure times that runs between the airport, the Republican 
Palace, the Palestine and Sheraton hotels, and the 
IAC/Al-Rasheed.  Travelers may register for this flight from 
Amman or get more information about it by contacting LTC 
Chuck Litzleman of HACC-Amman at 962-77-485-998 or by e-mail 
at ChuckLitz@hotmail.com.  Upon approval by HACC, or with 
valid identification certifying membership in one of the 
above categories of authorized travelers, passengers will 
purchase tickets for a flight directly from Royal Jordanian 
Airlines. 
 
------- 
AIRSERV 
------- 
 
¶5. (U) A second air option is offered by the USAID grantee 
AirServ, which is operating 14-seat aircraft from Amman to 
Baghdad twice a day on Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday, and 
once a day on Tuesday.  Flights from Amman on Sunday and 
Wednesday also continue to Erbil, and on Monday and Thursday 
also continue to Basra.  (This schedule will be valid 
throughout October.) USAID personnel fly free of charge on 
this flight.  Personnel of USAID implementing partners and 
unaffiliated humanitarian NGOs are charged USD 165 for a 
one-way ticket to Baghdad, with extra charges to continue to 
Basra and Erbil.  US and foreign diplomats may use these 
flights if space is available and are charged USD 660 for a 
one-way ticket to Baghdad, with extra charges for Basra and 
Erbil.  No military personnel are allowed on the flight. 
Passengers may carry no more than 20 kilos of luggage; excess 
baggage will be carried at an additional charge if there is 
room.  In Baghdad, AirServ does not offer ground 
transportation from the airport; passengers will need to make 
their own arrangements for such transportation.  Persons 
wishing to register for this flight, obtain a full flight 
schedule, or find out further information may do so by 
contacting the AirServ booking office at 962-79-694-1365 or 
by e-mail at Jordan@airserv.org 
 
----- 
UNHAS 
----- 
 
¶6. (U) UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) flights are a 
third option for air transport from Amman to Baghdad.  The UN 
is currently operating four aircraft flying at different 
times between Amman and Baghdad, as well as to other 
destinations in Iraq and in neighboring countries.  According 
to the current flight schedule, there is at least one flight 
a day, departing Amman between 0830 and 1000 and traveling to 
Baghdad and back, from Sunday to Thursday.  There are also 
flights departing Amman at 0830 for Erbil on Mondays, 
Wednesdays, and Fridays.  UNHAS no longer flies to Basra. 
The recent drawdown of UN personnel in Iraq has meant that 
the schedule is subject to change on a day-to-day basis, 
depending upon the needs of the UN.  It also likely will mean 
a substantial decrease in flights into Iraq in the near 
future, after the last of the UN staff evacuations have been 
completed.  Current schedules may be obtained by contacting 
UNHAS at 962-79-666-9947 or by e-mail at 
rabie.allouh@wfp.org.  Seats on the UN flight are available 
free of charge to two tiers of passengers, with UN personnel 
given priority.  If space is available, members of 
humanitarian NGOs operating in support of the UN mission to 
Iraq and high-level (First Secretary and above) diplomatic 
personnel on official travel related to humanitarian work in 
Iraq may also use the aircraft free of charge, on a 
first-come, first-served basis.  If space remains after these 
two categories of passengers have been fully served, other 
governmental personnel may be able to obtain seats on the 
flight subject if clearance is granted from the office of the 
UN Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq.  Passengers are limited 
to a maximum of 25 kilos of luggage, although this amount may 
be limited even further, based on the needs of the UN.  In 
Baghdad, the UN is offering land transport between the 
airport and the Canal Hotel, timed with the arrival and 
departure schedule.  Passengers for UNHAS flights cannot 
register by telephone; booking requests must be placed by 
e-mail to iraq.unhas@wfp.org.  Further information on UNHAS 
booking procedures, regulations, and points of contact may 
obtained at www.unjlc.org 
 
----------------------------- 
OTHER LOGISTICAL REQUIREMENTS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) There are no visa requirements for entry into Iraq; 
travelers to Iraq crossing the land border must pay a fee 
equivalent to approx. 40 US cents.  Jordanian compliance with 
CPA Order 16 (signed June 27, 2003), requesting that foreign 
governments honor expired Iraqi passports less than four 
years out of date, has been spotty.  Jordan does not require 
visas for Iraqi passport holders; however, it has turned away 
many Iraqis at the port of entry.  GOJ is also considering 
the imposition of a more stringent set of documentary 
requirements for Iraqis in the near future (ref B). Jordan 
does require visas for US and EU passport holders, which may 
be purchased for JD 18/USD 25 upon arrival in Jordan.  USG 
employees are reminded to consult the Foreign Visitors Guide 
for information on official notification procedures for 
traveling to Jordan. 
GNEHM