This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 002767 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/22/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL ASEC PGOV YM KICC COUNTER TERRORISM DEMARCHE
SUBJECT: CHARGE'S NOVEMBER 22 MEETING WITH FM QIRBI: 
ARTICLE 98; AL-MOAYAD; CT COOPERATION/DETAINEES 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 323777 
     ¶B. SANAA 2753 
     ¶C. SANAA 2743 
     ¶D. SANAA 2742 
     ¶E. SANAA 2691 
     ¶F. SANAA 2617 
     ¶G. S/ES #200325181 
 
Classified By: Charge D' Affaires Alan G. Misenheimer, 
for reasons 1.5, b and d 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: During Charge,s 11/22 call on FM Qirbi, 
there was discussion of: Article 98 negotiations (in &final 
stages8); CT Cooperation/Detainees (Embassy to maintain 
steady dialogue with Interior Minister and PSO Chief); and 
the al-Moayed Extradition (relatives may seek visas to visit 
defendants in the U.S.).  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) On November 22, Charge, accompanied by Pol/Econ Chief, 
called on FM Qirbi to deliver several demarches (septels), as 
well as to deliver the Secretary,s eid message (ref a) and 
signed original of the Secretary,s 10/8 letter on Article 98 
(ref g).  There was discussion of three additional topics. 
 
¶3. (C) ARTICLE 98: Qirbi expressed appreciation for the 
Secretary,s letter and acknowledged that he had already 
 
SIPDIS 
received the text (ref f).  He commented that Article 98 
negotiations in Washington were going well and had entered 
the "final stages."  He predicted rapid movement to a 
mutually agreed final text following a brief hiatus during 
the Eid and Thanksgiving holidays. 
 
¶4. (C) CT COOPERATION/DETAINEES: Charge briefed Qirbi on 
recent Embassy contacts with Interior Minister Alimi and PSO 
Chief Gamish, who had both provided some further 
clarification of ROYG procedures for determining which 
detainees would be released (ref b).  Charge stressed that 
unanswered questions nevertheless remain, and that it would 
be preferable for Yemen to provide such background prior to 
public announcements that releases have already taken place 
or are imminent.  Qirbi reiterated his call (ref c) for 
Embassy to pursue steady dialogue with Alimi and Gamish, 
especially the latter, to avoid disconnects in CT cooperation. 
 
¶5. (C) The FM offered the view, furthermore, that the ROYG,s 
recent public announcement of detainee releases ) even 
though none has yet been released ) were useful to 
demonstrate, both to family members and to critics, that the 
ROYG is constantly reviewing the issue and positive movement 
is possible.  Finally, he noted approvingly that Yemen,s 
Ambassador in Washington had been pursuing numerous contacts 
) including State, Defense, the White House, the FBI and the 
Pentagon ) to resolve any problems in counter-terrorism 
cooperation and address any U.S. misunderstanding of ROYG 
policy on releasing detainees. 
 
¶6. (C) MOAYED EXTRADITION: Qirbi noted that the U.S. court 
had appointed two lawyers for al-Moayad and Zayed, and said 
he understood family members wished to hire one or more 
additional attorneys.  He acknowledged that Yemen,s 
Ambassador in Washington is assisting in legal arrangements 
for the case.  Qirbi said he hoped the USG would consider 
favorably visa applications by any family members who wished 
to travel to the U.S. to visit the defendants or assist with 
the case.  Charge offered assurance that any such visa 
applications would be handled in accordance with U.S. law and 
regulations. 
MISENHEIMER