This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000475 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV AND DRL/IRF 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIRF PGOV PHUM VM HUMANR RELFREE
SUBJECT: THICH QUANG DO UNDER "ADMINISTRATIVE 
SURVEILLANCE" UNTIL SEPTEMBER 3, 2003 
 
REF:  A) 01 HANOI 1340   B) FBIS SEP 20010608000100 
 
¶1.  (U) The Most Venerable Thich Quang Do remains 
under  "administrative surveillance," based on a 
decree, which although dated June 1, 2001, in fact has 
an effective time period of September 3, 1998 until 
September 3, 2003.  Post has seen at least one press 
release denouncing Thich Quang Do's continued "pagoda 
arrest" past June 1, but wishes to clarify that 
according to the refs and recent confirmation from 
Thich Tue Sy, September 3, 2003 has always been the 
correct expiration date. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) A junior monk whose duties have included 
looking after Thich Quang Do, related to Thich Tue Sy 
that Thich Quang Do is in good health and looks 
forward to being freed from administrative 
surveillance on September 3.  Thich Tue Sy attributed 
any confusion over the expiration date to overlapping 
decisions that were issued upon Thich Quang Do's 
release from prison in September 1998 under a special 
amnesty, and subsequently on May 31 and June 1, 2001. 
 
¶3.  (U) Thich Quang Do was originally sentenced to 
five years' imprisonment and five years' 
administrative surveillance in 1995.  Upon his release 
in September 1998, he was still subject to the five- 
year administrative surveillance requirement until 
September 3, 2003. 
 
¶4.  (U) After Thich Quang Do's failed attempt to 
"rescue" The Most Venerable Thich Huyen Quang from his 
pagoda in Quy Nhon and return with him to HCMC in May 
2001, two other decisions were issued on May 31 and 
June 1, 2001.  These decisions reaffirmed that the 
original five-year administrative surveillance period 
was still in effect until September 3, 2003. 
 
¶5.  (U) Post will continue to keep in contact with 
those close to Thich Quang Do and monitor the 
situation. 
 
YAMAUCHI