This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 HANOI 000264 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD PTER CU IR IZ KN SU SY VM DPRK
SUBJECT:  VIETNAM'S "TRADITIONAL FRIENDS" 
 
REFS:  A.  01 Hanoi 2817   B.  02 Hanoi 716 
 
       ¶C.  02 Hanoi 1181   D.  02 Hanoi 589 
       ¶E.  01 Hanoi 3098 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  Vietnam has strived to maintain good 
ties with a number of the world's most troubling states, 
including Cuba, Iraq, North Korea (DPRK), Iran, Libya, 
Sudan, and Syria.  With the exception of Sudan and Syria, 
all have embassies in Hanoi.  These relations are largely an 
outgrowth of the material, financial, political, and moral 
support given to Vietnam during the War years.  Apart from 
trade with Iraq, most of the countries offer little, if any, 
value economically to Vietnam.  Politically, these countries 
also contribute little as Vietnam continues its push toward 
the mainstream of the international diplomatic community. 
The state media and GVN officials nonetheless continue a 
drumbeat of support and undertake regular high-level 
official visits with most of these diplomatic partners.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
---------------- 
FRIENDS WITH ALL 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In accordance with a policy adopted in 1991 at 
the Seventh Party Congress, Vietnam has moved steadily to 
conduct a foreign policy that has at its core the goal of 
establishing and maintaining good diplomatic and economic 
relations with every nation.  In summing up 2002, Foreign 
Minister Nguyen Dy Nien reaffirmed that "Vietnam is prepared 
to be a friend and reliable partner of all countries in the 
international community."  In perhaps one of the more 
interesting examples of this track, Vietnam maintains 
cordial diplomatic relations with Israel (which maintains a 
small embassy in Hanoi) while showing great sympathy and 
respect towards Yasser Arafat (who has visited Vietnam many 
times) and the Palestine Authority, whose ambassador is the 
dean of the Hanoi diplomatic corps and has served here 
nearly 20 years (ref A). 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
USG CONCERNS DO NOT IMPACT GVN FOREIGN POLICY 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  According to Doan Ngoc Boi, Deputy Director 
General of the MFA's West Asia and Africa Department (the 
MFA section that covers most of the Middle Eastern countries 
of concern), the MFA leadership understands the USG's views 
about what are variously called "states of concern" and 
"rogue states," but the MFA is charged with carrying out the 
GVN's policy of maintaining good diplomatic relations "with 
as many countries as possible."  Vietnam is "generally 
sympathetic" to the US-led war on terrorism, but "this does 
not affect our relations with traditional friends -- these 
days, we have no enemies," he added. 
 
------------------------------- 
CUBA - "BROTHERLY" RELATIONSHIP 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Cuba and Vietnam have a close and long-standing 
relationship and claim to share a kindred revolutionary 
spirit.  Exemplifying Cuba's importance to Vietnam, Prime 
Minister Pham Van Khai visited in October 2002.  In 2001, 
Foreign Minister Nien and then-Vice President Binh also 
visited.  Cuban President Castro has come to Vietnam twice, 
in 1973 and 1995, and other high-level visits have occurred 
at a regular pace.  Tran Thanh Huan, senior expert in the 
MFA's Latin America section, predicted that Communist Party 
of Vietnam General Secretary Nong Duc Manh might visit Cuba 
during 2003.  In addition, Vietnam expects a reciprocal 
visit from Cuba's foreign minister.  However, no dates have 
been set for either visit, he added. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  In a briefing to the diplomatic community 
following the Prime Minister's visit, MFA Assistant Foreign 
Minister (AFM) Nguyen Duc Hung described the Cuba - Vietnam 
relationship as "traditional, long-standing, and brotherly." 
In addition, AFM Hung said that the two countries "continue 
to look for ways to help each other."  AFM Hung explained 
that Cuba has assisted Vietnam in the areas of medicine, 
medical training, and Spanish language programs.  During the 
Prime Minister's visit, Vietnam agreed to sell additional 
rice to Cuba, AFM Hung noted.  In 2002, Vietnam exported 
125,000 tons of rice to Cuba; the total volume for 2003 is 
expected to rise to 150,000 tons, according to a press 
report.  Another press report claimed that the rice will be 
sold on "easy payment terms."  AFM Hung confirmed to poloff 
on the margins of the briefing that Cuba would pay for the 
rice with "hard currency." 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The MFA's Huan separately noted that the GVN is 
"paying more attention to developing the bilateral economic 
potential."  In addition to rice, Huan said Vietnam would 
like to export tea, footwear, and textiles to Cuba.  Vietnam 
"will never forget" the help Cuba provided during Vietnam's 
"revolutionary struggle," including hospitals, roads, and 
other materiel support.  Two-way trade, however, remains 
modest, at about USD 50 million per year.  Huan predicted 
that if the USG were to lift the sanctions on Cuba, trade 
would improve "substantially."  He said that Vietnam is 
"totally against" sanctions and that "only the U.S." views 
Cuba as a "rogue state."  There is no evidence that Cuba 
possesses or is attempting to acquire nuclear or chemical 
weapons, Huan added.  The head of the Vietnam-Cuba 
Friendship Association on January 29 said that Vietnam 
"strongly condemns the US outdated embargo against Cuba and 
demands an immediate end." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
IRAQ:  OLD FRIEND, STRONG ECONOMIC TIES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Unique in its relations with the various 
countries of concern, Vietnam has a significant trade 
relationship with Iraq.  The MFA's Boi said that in 2001 two- 
way trade was about USD 750 million.  While final figures 
for 2002 have not yet been compiled, he added that  two-way 
trade may have reached USD one billion.  Boi reiterated that 
all two-way trade activity is "within the UN framework."  He 
admitted that Vietnam still owes Iraq about USD 100 million 
from the Vietnam War-era.  He said that Vietnam would like 
to increase humanitarian aid as a way to pay the debt, but 
is hampered by the UN resolutions.  According to an Egyptian 
emboff, the "strong relations" between the two countries 
make it "unlikely" Iraq would ever attempt to collect on 
this debt.  The Egyptian emboff added that Saddam Hussein 
felt a "special warmth" toward Vietnam since Vietnamese 
doctors helped his son recover from a near fatal automobile 
accident several years ago. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  While the GVN "agrees" that Iraq should carry out 
the appropriate UN resolutions, Boi reiterated that the GVN 
opposes any military action against Iraq and "fully 
supports" the "sovereignty and territorial integrity" of 
Iraq.  In addition, the GVN has stated "on many occasions" 
that internal issues "should be decided only by the Iraqi 
people."  A US attack on Iraq "would also not be helpful" to 
the US-Vietnam relationship, he predicted. 
 
------------------------------- 
DPRK:  RELATIONS ON THE UPSWING 
------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU)   Vietnam's relations with the DPRK have seen 
several ups and downs in recent years.  Pham Tien Van, 
Deputy Director for MFA's Asia I bureau, noted that Vietnam 
and the DPRK have "traditional ties" dating back to the 
1950s.  Van described the bilateral relationship as 
"excellent" from that era through the Vietnam War.  He added 
that Vietnam remained "very grateful" for the moral and 
materiel support the DPRK had provided.  In the years 
following the war, relations were strained, according to 
Van, because of Vietnam's actions in Cambodia.  At the time, 
the DPRK sided with the PRC in opposing Vietnam's occupation 
of Cambodia.  Relations took a further nosedive in 1992 when 
Vietnam, as part of its policy of reaching out to the world 
community, established diplomatic relations with the 
Republic of Korea (ROK).  Ngo Xuan Binh, Director for the 
Center for Korean Studies, noted that the DPRK subsequently 
had made some "tentative overtures" to some western 
countries and had "slowly become a little less isolated." 
In that respect, Binh opined that perhaps the DPRK had been 
influenced by Vietnam's own expanding foreign policy. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Illustrating the bilateral relationship's upward 
trend, recent activity has included: (1) the reconvening of 
the Joint Economic Committee in October 1991 for the first 
time since Vietnam established diplomatic relations with the 
ROK in 1992; (2) a visit by GVN President Tran Duc Luong in 
May 2002 (ref C); and (3) other bilateral exchanges, such as 
the visit to Vietnam by the Chairman of the DPRK National 
Assembly in 2001 and the visit to the DPRK in October 2002 
by General Le Van Dung, Director of the General Political 
Department of the People's Army of Vietnam.  Binh emphasized 
that "Vietnam's relations with the DPRK are strong and 
should continue to improve." 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  The Korean Studies Center's Binh separately 
opined that the recent increase in bilateral activity 
stemmed from  DPRK recognition of the success Vietnam had 
achieved with its market reforms.  Binh admitted, however, 
that "it is very hard to know what they think."  Binh also 
lamented that the DPRK's economy is in "such bad shape that 
it has little, if anything to offer" in terms of trade. 
Thus, the potential for two-way trade, currently at a "very 
low level" is "not good," even under barter arrangements, he 
predicted.  The MFA's Van said that Vietnam would continue 
to assist the DPRK, noting that in 2002, Vietnam had donated 
5,000 tons of rice.  Van added that, given the DPRK's dire 
financial situation, it was "unlikely" that Vietnam would 
collect on the USD 10 million debt the DPRK owed Vietnam 
from a 1996 rice "sale." 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  Van noted that "more stability" on the Korean 
Peninsula would also have a positive impact on Vietnam's 
relations with both the DPRK and the ROK.  He added that 
Vietnam wanted to see the region "nuclear-free."  A January 
10 statement by the MFA further stated that Vietnam hoped 
all parties would "exercise restraint" and engage in 
dialogue that will result in "peace, stability, and a 
nuclear-free status."  Van admitted, however, that Vietnam 
was not "well placed" for an active mediation role in the 
Korean Peninsula, while admitting that, during his visit to 
the DPRK, President Luong had passed a message to his hosts 
from the ROK leadership. 
 
----------------------------- 
IRAN:  TRADITIONAL FRIENDSHIP 
----------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  From Vietnam's perspective, Iran remains one of 
its trusted and traditional friends.  The MFA's Boi 
described the bilateral political relationship as 
"excellent," noting that "we have many common views and 
interests, including a peaceful solution to the Iraq 
crisis."  Boi added that Iran had even made overtures about 
becoming a "dialogue partner" with ASEAN (ref E). 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  In 1995, Vietnam's president visited Iran, while 
in 1996 Iran's president visited Vietnam.  Nong Duc Manh, 
then-chairman of the National Assembly and now General 
Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, visited Iran in 
 
SIPDIS 
¶1999.  More recently, President Luong visited in October 
2002 and, with his hosts, signed several agreements on 
economic, technical, and cultural cooperation.  President 
Luong invited the Iranian president to make a return visit, 
but Boi declined to predict when such a visit will take 
place. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  Economic activity lags behind the political 
relationship.  Boi lamented that, despite "great economic 
potential," two-way trade is running at only about USD 40 
million.  Boi suggested that the main factors inhibiting a 
stronger economic relationship are: (1) Iran has established 
stronger links with other countries that export products 
similar to Vietnam (e.g. rice and textiles); and (2) Iranian 
and Vietnamese businessmen "do not understand" each other 
well.  Boi opined that a deterioration in the Iraq situation 
could have a positive impact on the Vietnam - Iran economic 
relationship, because if Vietnamese businessmen "lose" the 
Iraq market, they will make stronger efforts to penetrate 
the Iran market. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
LIBYA:  FRIENDLY, BUT NOT QUITE TRADITIONAL 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  The MFA's Boi described relations with Libya as 
"good to normal."  While the two countries have diplomatic 
missions in each other's capitals, there is "not much" 
bilateral activity.  Boi said that Vietnam is "grateful" to 
Libya for the political and economic support provided during 
the Vietnam War and that the two countries share a 
"revolutionary background."  Boi added that Vietnam also 
watches carefully over the welfare of approximately 3,000 
Vietnamese contract workers in Libya employed by a Korean 
company for a large irrigation project.  Two-way trade is 
"under USD 10 million" and unlikely to increase more than 
incrementally in the foreseeable future, Boi predicted. 
Factors inhibiting the development of increased economic 
relations, according to Boi, include: (1) a small market; 
(2) strong competition from the PRC; (3) distance; and (4) a 
harsh climate. 
 
¶17.  (SBU)  A December 2002 visit by a Libyan parliamentary 
delegation received significant coverage in Vietnam's state- 
controlled media.  Foreign Minister Nien told his Libyan 
guests that their visit "demonstrated Libya's desire to 
strengthen ties with Vietnam."   Deputy Prime Minister Vu 
Khoan urged both countries to work hard so that economic 
ties could "reach their potential," according to a press 
report.  Boi noted, however, that no other major visits are 
planned over the next year. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
SUDAN AND SYRIA:  MOSTLY BELOW THE GVN'S RADAR SCREEN 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
18 (SBU)  According to the MFA's Boi, the offshore 
ambassadors of Sudan and Syria (in Jakarta and Beijing, 
respectively) have only ever visited Hanoi to present their 
credentials.  An Egyptian emboff said that the Sudanese 
ambassador had expressed little interest in advancing 
Vietnam - Sudan relations during his December 2002 visit. 
Assistant Foreign Minister Nguyen Phu Binh visited Sudan in 
2001, during a trip that also included Tanzania and Angola. 
Two-way trade between the two countries is "maybe USD one 
million," Boi estimated.  Boi added that the one area for 
potential cooperation is in agriculture.  Vietnam plans to 
send agricultural experts to Sudan to help improve rice- 
growing techniques in 2003.  Boi commented that Vietnam was 
"grateful" to Sudan for the "political and moral" support 
during the Vietnam War.  While the relationship is "not 
especially close," Vietnam also sees Sudan as an important 
part of its strategy to strengthen overall relations with 
Africa. 
 
¶19.  (SBU)  Tran Viet Tu, MFA Asia II expert, called 
Vietnam's  bilateral relationship with Syria  "truly quiet." 
Tu said that, while Syria had supported Vietnam during the 
war years, the relationship had not significantly "moved 
forward from there."  Tu said that in an effort to move the 
relationship forward, then-GVN President Le Duc Anh visited 
Syria in 1995, but there has never been a reciprocal visit. 
Tu added that no visits are planned for 2003.  Tu suggested 
that Syria had been "very much preoccupied" with Israel, and 
has "never given much thought" to Vietnam since the end of 
the Vietnam War.  Concerning trade, Tu said that the two-way 
trade is "too low to estimate."  Vietnam does not view that 
Syria is a state sponsor of terrorism, Tu claimed. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶20.  (SBU)  The key to understanding Vietnam's ongoing 
relations with the world's "bad guys" is what a senior MFA 
official called Vietnam's "sense of history."  The common 
thread in bilateral relations with these countries is the 
political, moral, and sometimes material and financial 
support they gave to Vietnam during the war.   Vietnam will 
continue to maintain good relations with these countries, 
while at the same time seeking to become more involved in 
the mainstream multilateral and regional environment.  GVN 
senior leaders do not see a conflict in improving and 
enhancing relationships with the U.S., western Europe, and 
other countries while at the same time keeping up ties with 
and voicing support for "old friends." 
PORTER