This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TF1Z01:  SANAA EAC MEETING MARCH 25 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  The Ambassador convened an Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) March 23 to discuss current threat 
information, security measures and Embassy security posture. 
No new threats were reported.  EAC decided to move from 
MoveSafe to StandFast effective 3/27 at the close of business 
in anticipation of possible demonstrations on Friday after 
mosque sermons.  Key offices and personnel represented at the 
meeting included: AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, 
DATT, ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN and RMO.  End Summary. 
 
-------------- 
No New Threats 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  DATT briefed EAC on developments with the war in 
Iraq.  Pol/Econ briefed on arrangements being made to provide 
humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ORCA reported no new threats.  RSO said the 
Ministry of Interior had no information about upcoming 
demonstrations but that concern remained for a potential one 
on Friday after prayers. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
MoveSafe Posture for Non-official Americans 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  PSO Chief Gamish proposed to Ambassador March 24 
that Yemeni security provide escorts to non-official expat 
Americans for any movements they want to make outside their 
home for the duration of the Iraq war.  PSO proposed an 
operations center be established at or near the Embassy, to 
be staffed by PSO, Embassy and MOI personnel, to which Amcits 
could call when escorts are needed.  Ambassador welcomed the 
idea.  RSO, PSO and MOI met on March 25 to discuss 
implementation details and these will continue to be 
discussed.  The arrangement would parallel existing Embassy 
MoveSafe system currently being used by official Americans. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  PSO Chief Gamish also exchanged lists of expat 
Americans in Yemen with Ambassador.  At EAC, CONS reported 
that the list of approximately 40 expat Amcits was 
comprehensive though changing every day as Amcits arrive and 
leave Yemen. 
 
------------------------ 
Embassy Security Posture 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (C)  Barring any new threats arising, EAC decided to 
change security posture from MoveSafe to StandFast on 
Thursday, March 27 at COB in anticipation of possible 
demonstrations after Friday prayers.  If no demonstrations or 
other threats arise, Embassy personnel would revert to 
MoveSafe posture at COB on Friday 3/28. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Town hall Meeting 3/26: 
Discussion on Possible Authorized Departure 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Ambassador asked EAC members their opinion on 
requesting authorized departure status.  He said that if 
anyone asks that we request it, Post will propose it to the 
Department.  EAC members reported that no one in their 
sections had requested it.  A town hall meeting will be held 
on March 26 for all official Americans to discuss authorized 
departure and to solicit views directly from staff.  Post 
will also hold a warden meeting next week. 
HULL