This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 001051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL GM
SUBJECT:  BADEN-WUERTTEMBERG MINISTER OF INTERIOR THOMAS 
SCHAEUBLE CONCERNED OVER INCREASE IN VIOLENT CRIME 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In a meeting with the Consul General on 
January 29, Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) Minister of Interior, 
Dr. Thomas Schaeuble (CDU) expressed his regret over anti- 
American statements in recent election campaigns.  On 
terrorism, Schaeuble is concerned about a lack of 
cooperation from the Muslim community in B-W.  The B-W 
police have seen a significant increase in violent crime 
committed by ethnic Germans.  Schaeuble complained about 
leaks of sensitive information, which hinders closer 
cooperation with foreign intelligence services.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Minister Schaeuble regretted the anti-American 
rhetoric in the Social Democratic Party's (SPD) election 
campaigns in Hesse and Lower Saxony.  He noted that there 
has always been a certain amount of anti-Americanism in 
Germany but that the national government should refrain from 
such statements.  Cooperation in southwest between the U.S. 
military and the B-W police has always been excellent, 
Schauble said. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On internal security, Schaeuble sees an "abstract 
threat potential" in Germany.  Germany has a large Muslim 
community and some members are criminals.  There are about 
three million Muslims living in Germany, and three to four 
hundred thousand in B-W.  About 50 Muslims in B-W are 
considered dangerous.  According to Schaeuble, the lack of 
integration of the Muslim community into the German 
population creates tensions.  He described Turkish 
communities as a "state within a state."  It is almost 
impossible for police authorities to penetrate and observe 
Muslim groups.  These communities provide excellent hiding 
spaces for potential terrorists.  He also regretted that the 
Muslim community has not provided any tips to police to help 
find and arrest potential terrorists.  Schaeuble noted that 
this reflects badly on law-abiding Muslims.  Most arrests 
have come from tips from allied intelligence and law 
enforcement services.  Schaeuble added that he wishes that 
U.S. intelligence agencies would be more willing to share 
information.  On the other hand, he admitted that frequent 
leaks from German authorities to the media are not helpful. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Schaeuble also described ethnic Germans as a 
problem.  Drug trafficking and the increased brutality of 
crimes are his biggest concern.  However, there is no 
evidence of links between ethnic Germans and the Russian 
mafia. Schaeuble pointed out that similar to the Muslim 
communities, ethnic Germans and young people in particular, 
show limited interest in playing an active role in German 
communities. 
 
BODDE