This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPA CA
SUBJECT:  GALILEO DEMARCHE - CANADIAN GOVERNMENT SUPPORTS U.S. 
POSITION ON M-CODE OVERLAY 
 
REF: A) STATE 259165 B) Ottawa 00374 
 
¶1. This is a sensitive but unclassified cable and should be treated 
accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In response to reftel A request for a high-level demarche 
on EU plans for Galileo Public Regulated Service (PRS) to overlay 
the radio frequencies used by the GPS M-code, Ambassador Cellucci 
wrote letters to the Ministers of Defense, Foreign Affairs, 
Transportation and Industry.  Minister of Foreign Affairs Graham 
provided a coordinated response from the Government of Canada in 
his letter of January 27, 2003 to the Ambassador.  The text of the 
letter, provided in paragraph 2 below, provides assurances that 
Canada will "continue to fully support the United States in urging 
the European Commission to agree to adopt different frequencies 
from the M-code." Ambassador Cellucci also discussed this issue 
with Minister of Transportation Collenette on January 31. 
Collenette echoed the supportive position expressed in Graham's 
letter. 
 
¶3. Text of Minister Graham's letter. 
 
Dear Ambassador: 
 
     Thank you for your letter of December 19, 2002, regarding the 
proposed European Galileo satellite navigation system and the 
implications for NATO members. 
     Canada has always publicly maintained the position that 
Galileo and the Global Positioning System (GPS) of the United 
States should be compatible and interoperable for the benefit of 
all potential users. 
 
     As noted in your letter, the European Commission (EC) has 
recommended that Galileo's Public Regulated Service" (or PRS), use 
the same frequencies that are used by the military service (M-code) 
of the GPS.  During discussions at NATO, Canada has publicly stated 
its concern that, by sharing the same frequencies, the ability of 
the Alliance to jam enemy forces employing the Galileo system could 
be impeded.  Canada's position is that Galileo should not use the 
same frequencies at the GPS M-code signal unless it can 
conclusively be proven that there will be no interference with the 
military use of the GPS. 
 
     To that end, Canada has urged the European Commission to 
conduct a thorough testing of the system design to prove its claim 
that overlaying the Galileo PRS code on the GPS M-code would not in 
any way interfere with the military use of the GPS.  The EC has yet 
to conclusively prove its claim.  Until the EC can do so, Canada 
will continue to fully support the United States in urging the 
European Commission to agree to adopt different frequencies from 
the M-code.  With the assistance of the European Union members in 
NATO, we will support efforts to generate a consensus to drop the M- 
code overlay option for the Galileo system. 
 
     I look forward to discussing this issue with you in the coming 
months with a view to seeking a resolution in favour of an 
effective global civil navigation satellite system architecture. 
 
                              Sincerely