This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 003059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/ESP (GGLASS) S/CT, EUR/SE AND EUR/WE 
TREASURY FOR GENERAL COUNSEL (DAUFHAUSER), OFAC DIRECTOR 
(NEWCOMB), AND TREASURY TASK FORCE FOR TERRORIST FINANCING 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC EFIN PTER PREL CVIS TU
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE: TURKISH REACTION TO BATASUNA 
DESIGNATION 
 
 
REF: STATE 118179 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On May 9, MFA Deputy DG for intelligence and 
research Hakan Okcal told us the MFA had circulated 
interagency reftel information about additional names 
affiliated with ETA (Batasuna, Euskal Herritarrock and Herri 
Batasuna).  If GOT agencies found assets owned or controlled 
by these additional entities, they would blocked such assets 
using administrative means, he said.  The GOT would not be 
able to formally designate these names on its terrorist 
finance freeze list, Okcal explained, because the GOT only 
designates names that are on the consolidated list of the UN 
sanctions committee. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Okcal said Batusuna was well known in Turkey 
because Turks see parallels between ETA/Batasuna and 
KADEK/HADEP - both are political wings of terrorist groups, 
he claimed.  He hastened to add that the GOT doesn't expect 
the designation of Batasuna to lead to similiar action on 
HADEP; rather he said he was characterizing private views of 
some Turks on the KADEK/HADEP connection. 
PEARSON