This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001354 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/08/2013 
TAGS: EPET PINS PGOV ASEC NI
SUBJECT: ANTICIPATED MILITARY OPERATIONS IN THE DELTA 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 01333 
	¶B. ABUJA 01338 
 
 
Classified By Charge Dawn Liberi. Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
1) (C) Summary: In telcon with Embassy corporate 
responsibility officer (CRO) Charge was informed that 
military operations into the Delta region were 
imminent and would start within 48 hours, though 
possibly as early as tomorrow August 9.  End summary. 
 
 
2)  (C) Charge was called by CRO who is in Port 
Harcourt and was informed that Shell Oil head of 
security had contacted CRO to inform him that shell 
had taken several army generals on a helicopter 
overflight of the Delta (Warri region) earlier today 
as part of a reconnaissance visit. 
 
 
3)  (C) Shell security chief indicated that plans were 
afoot for the military to commence operations in the 
delta within the next 48 hours.  Speculation is that 
these operations could begin as soon as Saturday 
August 9 or early Monday morning August 11.  Given 
Sunday church services it was thought that the 
possibility of collateral casualties would deter a 
Sunday operation. 
 
 
4)  (C) In a separate conversation, CRO had been 
informed that the Chief of Police was sending 
approximately 100 hi-lux all terrain vehicles to the 
Delta.  Of note, these vehicles were purchased 
purportedly by the Niger Delta Development Corp 
(NDDC). 
 
 
¶5. (C) Post will monitor situation closely and report 
accordingly. 
 
 
LIBERI