This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221224Z Oct 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006614 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, EUR/PPD, NEA/PPD, NEA/NGA, NEA/IR 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO MOPS PREL PGOV IZ TU
SUBJECT: PROPOSED PRESS GUIDANCE ON TURKISH TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
IN IRAQ 
 
 
In view of growing speculation in the Turkish media that 
U.S. support for the deployment of Turkish troops in Iraq is 
wavering, post requests Department clearance of the 
following suggested press guidance. 
 
 
BEGIN SUGGESTED GUIDANCE 
 
 
Q: What are your views on the Turkish government's decision 
to authorize the deployment of forces in Iraq? 
 
 
-- The United States welcomes the vote of the Turkish 
Parliament authorizing the Government to contribute Turkish 
troops, under appropriate circumstances, for the 
stabilization force in Iraq. 
 
 
-- The United States believes that Turkey can play a helpful 
role in achieving stability in Iraq by encouraging 
restoration of trade and participating in the reconstruction 
of Iraq. 
 
 
-- It is not a secret that the opposition in the IGC has 
been broader and deeper than expected.  Since it took some 
four months for the government of Turkey to secure a 
parliamentary vote on this subject, it should not come as a 
surprise that it will take some time to work this issue in 
Iraq, where democratic politics are in their early stages. 
 
 
-- UNSC 1511 directs the International Community to treat 
the IGC as the embodiment of sovereignty until there is an 
elected government in place, and urges the coalition to turn 
over as much responsibility as possible to the IGC as 
quickly as it can be accomplished. 
 
 
-- The Coalition retains the decisive voice on security 
issues, but needs to exercise that responsibility in a way 
that does not undermine the larger objections laid out in 
the UNSCR. 
 
 
-- The recent bombing of the Turkish Embassy in Baghdad 
underscores the importance of close collaboration on 
security issues between the U.S. and Turkey in Iraq.  That 
cooperation prevented loss of life in that incident. 
 
 
-- We want to work out any future deployment in a way that 
would minimize any risk of Turkish casualties. 
 
 
-- Finally, we all need to keep in mind our strategic 
objective.  We want to increase the stability and security 
of Iraq, not detract from it, and we want to do it in a way 
that lays a strong foundation for future Turkish-Iraqi 
relations.  We want two democratic neighbors, in a 
neighborhood where democracy is in short supply, to have a 
good, healthy, cooperative set of political and economic 
relations. 
 
 
Q: Has the U.S. Government changed its position on Turkish 
troop deployment as a result of opposition from the Iraqi 
Governing Council? 
 
 
-- No, the U.S. has not changed its position.  We firmly 
believe that Turkey can make an important contribution to 
stability in Iraq. 
 
 
-- We remain hopeful that an agreement satisfactory to all 
parties can be reached. 
 
 
Q: What is the cause of the delay in the start of 
negotiations between the U.S. and Turkey regarding a 
deployment of Turkish troops? 
 
 
-- There has been no delay.  Diplomatic and military 
contacts between the U.S. and Turkey to discuss Turkey's 
contribution of troops are underway and are continuing. 
 
 
-- The U.S. is committed to working with the Turkish 
government and military, as well as with the Iraqi Governing 
Council, to reach agreement on how a deployment of Turkish 
troops can best contribute to stability in Iraq. 
 
 
Q: When will Turkish troops go to Iraq?  How many troops 
will there be and in what region will they be deployed? 
 
 
-- The U.S. is consulting closely with Turkey's government 
and military regarding the details of a troop deployment. 
It would be premature to speculate on issues such as timing, 
numbers, and location of an eventual troop deployment. 
 
 
END SUGGESTED GUIDANCE. 
 
 
EDELMAN