This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PA (CHAYDEN), EB, PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO ETRD SNAR EAID MOPS PGOV HO KICC
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 12, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Op-ed by Ramon Villeda Bermudez (current Liberal Party 
Congressman) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" on 
11/12 entitled "Why did Colin Powell come to Honduras? ".  "The 
Honduran press received almost a dozen clues about the issues 
discussed with Secretary Powell, but Powell himself said that the 
fight against corruption in Central America is one of the main 
priorities and conditions to get the assistance the U.S. will 
offer to the countries of this region through the Millennium 
Challenge Account." 
 
"Why would he want to highlight this particular issue?  It seems 
that the position of Honduras at the top of the international 
scale of corruption has definitely caught the attention of our 
partners, and they are warning us beforehand about what we should 
do to improve that situation, in order to qualify to get more 
aid." 
 
"It's likely that the issues discussed with Powell and his 
delegation included the reorganization of the judicial system, as 
well as the political and legal reforms in Honduras.  It's also 
probable that President Maduro himself talked about the issue of 
coffee, which is crucial for the country as a whole, and 
especially for some businessmen who are very close to the 
President.  It's feasible that the Executive branch took full 
credit for the elimination of immunities, which was a particular 
decision by Congress that was taken without any external 
pressure." 
 
"Regarding our bilateral relationships, it's still unknown if our 
relationship with Cuba was a matter of discussion." 
 
"We believe our cooperation with the reconstruction efforts and 
our commitment to send troops to Iraq is something that should be 
part of our past and current agenda, it shouldn't be part of our 
plans for the future." 
 
"CAFTA was definitely one of the top issues in Powell's agenda. 
We suppose that President Maduro and his collaborators informed 
him that everything is on track, although I believe they didn't 
have time to explain to Powell the persistent doubts that some 
businessmen and even some ministers have about this agreement." 
 
"The issues of terrorism and narcotrafficking should have been 
emphasized on this visit more than any other.  The Honduran 
request for more helicopters and other equipment for these tasks 
is widely known.  After all, the successes on drug seizures and 
the arrests of drug traffickers have to help us to get more aid. 
But, here's where the issue of corruption comes up again, and as 
Powell said, our efforts to fight against it should be similar to 
our willingness to combat drug trafficking." 
 
"Furthermore, we believe President Maduro requested Powell the 
help of the U.S. delegate in the IMF in our negotiations with 
this international institution.  We don't know if the White House 
experts are aware of how important the U.S. support on this 
matter is.  Honduras needs to get the billion dollars for debt 
relief that our creditors promised to us in Stockholm." 
 
"It'll be helpful that President Maduro himself informs to the 
people what was discussed with Powell, to prevent any surprises 
in the future as it has happened before.  For instance, it was 
very unpleasant to find out, just a little before it was approved 
in Congress, that President Maduro and the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs had secretly signed an agreement with the U.S. in 
September 2002 that prohibits submitting troops from both 
countries to international criminal courts when they commit war 
crimes and crimes against humanity." 
 
"This kind of secrecy has caused an obvious distrust in our 
agreements with the U.S.  Such dishonorable agreements are not 
known in due time to the Congressmen and the Honduran people." 
 
Palmer