This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001744 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB AND WHA 
USDA FOR LINDA DETWILIER 
APP WINNIPEG SENDS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD PREL OTRA CA
SUBJECT: MANITOBA CONSERVATION LEADER REGISTERS CONCERN IN 
BSE CRISIS 
 
¶1. On 19 June, Manitoba Conservative Party leader (and head 
of Manitoba's Official Opposition in the Legislature) Stuart 
Murray visited new APP Winnipeg Consul to formally register 
the concerns of his constituents at the ongoing freeze of 
Canadian beef import into the United States.  He specifically 
asked if there was anything else that political leaders or 
beef producers could do to speed the reopening of the border. 
 Further, noting that some U.S. Senators had suggested 
reopening the border to Canadian beef could take as long as 
seven years, Murray asked if Consul had any indication as to 
how long the process might really take or if he saw any light 
at the end of the tunnel. 
 
¶2. Consul responded that while he was quite new to Canada and 
to the office, his initial impression was that the Canadian 
government was being quite cooperative and thorough in its 
investigation of the Alberta outbreak.  He underscored that 
the USG's responsibility first and foremost was the 
protection of U.S. consumers, but that the U.S. also 
understood the pain inflicted on Canadian ranchers.  Consul 
said that the U.S. would do everything it could to reopen the 
border to Canadian beef as quickly as possible, but added 
that any such decision must be based on sound science.  He 
pointed out that the task -- proving the existence of a 
negative -- was logically impossible, but that the U.S. would 
have to have a high confidence level in the science before 
acting. 
 
¶3. Murray asserted his belief that there was some political 
angle to the continuing ban.  Pointing both to the obvious 
benefits to the U.S. cattle industry of the border closure to 
the U.S. beef, as well as the recent decline in U.S.-Canadian 
relations and what he described as the poor relationship 
between PM Chretien and President Bush, Murray said the 
purpose of his call was to send the message that Manitoba's 
political leaders wanted to see the situation resolved 
quickly.  Consul agreed to report his views to Ottawa and 
Washington, and provided Murray with an June 6 backgrounder 
from USDA on BSE.  Consul also offered to keep Murray 
informed of any new developments he became aware of. 
 
¶4. COMMENT:  It is worth noting that under Murray's 
leadership, the Conservative party lost 4 of its 24 seats in 
the legislature in the June 3 provincial elections, and local 
press reports suggest Murray may face a leadership challenge 
in the next few months.  While Murray's concern for Manitoba 
farmers is real and justified, his approach to APP Winnipeg 
may also represent his desire to show himself as a man of 
action. End Comment. 
CELLUCCI