This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000396 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PTER IZ VM
SUBJECT:  "PROTESTING" FOR PEACE IN IRAQ 
 
REF:  FBIS SEP20030219000040 
 
¶1.  (U)  According to press reports, over 1,300 people 
turned up for a rally at Hanoi's downtown Cultural and 
Friendship Hall (a gift from the then-Soviet Union) on 
February 18 to demonstrate solidarity with the people of 
Iraq, express opposition to war and embargoes against Iraq, 
and to call for a "political solution" in accordance with 
the UN Charter, international law, and national independence 
and sovereignty.  (Reftel carries text of the resolution 
passed at the meeting, which received extensive media 
coverage.)  Organizers included the Vietnam Fatherland Front 
(a Communist Party of Vietnam organization), the Vietnam 
Peace Committee, the Vietnam-Iraq Friendship Association, 
and the Vietnam Committee for Solidarity and Cooperation 
with Asian, Africa, and Latin American People. 
Representatives from veterans, religious, workers, 
intellectuals, ethnic minorities, and other groups 
reportedly attended. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Several speakers highlighted Vietnam's own 
experiences as victim of war in sparking the "deep sympathy" 
of the Vietnamese people toward the Iraqi people and the 
desire to avoid further disruption to Iraqi lives.  The 
Secretary General of the Vietnam Fatherland Front lamented 
 
SIPDIS 
"strengthened military pressure" by the U.S., UK, and 
Australia and against Iraq, and expressed worry about these 
"threats to the peace and stability of the world."  Another 
speaker claimed war against Iraq would "violate 
international law and principle."  Another speaker noted 
that even many people in the U.S. and UK sought peace and 
opposed a war in Iraq.  Another noted that "U.S. and UK 
authorities should not proceed with a war against Iraq . . . 
and should avoid causing additional hardships" for the 
people of Iraq. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Septel will report on a similar meeting organized 
in Ho Chi Minh City on February 18, which also received 
extensive media coverage. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Comment:  Events like these are carefully staged by 
the CPV's "mass organizations" only after blessing from 
senior CPV officials, and do not necessarily reflect genuine 
popular opinion.  Nonetheless, the negative media coverage 
of the U.S. build-up in the Gulf region and our diplomatic 
efforts, the prominent coverage given recently to 
international anti-war protests, and the media sympathy 
expressed repeatedly for the Iraqi people have likely 
succeeded in raising public distrust of U.S. intentions and 
opposition to military action against one of Vietnam's 
"traditional friends."  Neither the CPV or GVN would be 
willing to permit spontaneous public demonstrations, 
however; they would view this as a threat to social 
stability and public order.  It is not improbable that these 
same mass organizations will be permitted, encouraged, or 
instructed to stage street protests near U.S. diplomatic 
facilities after the outset of any military campaign in 
Iraq, although authorities will be careful not to let them 
get out of control. 
BURGHARDT