This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 001426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2008 
TAGS: EFIN KU JO
SUBJECT: KUWAITI FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO JORDAN 
 
REF: AMMAN 1412 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR EDWARD W. GNEHM.  REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1.  (c)  Further to phone and email conversations between 
Ambassadors Jones and Gnehm, a March 10 meeting between the 
Ambassador and Prime Minister shed some light on the apparent 
misunderstanding between the Kuwaitis and Jordanians over the 
$100 million Kuwait had offered to deposit in the Jordanian 
central bank.  PM Abul Ragheb showed the Ambassador a letter 
from the director of the Kuwait Investment Authority offering 
to make such a deposit on behalf of the Kuwaiti government 
and setting the financial conditions, including a one year 
term for the deposit and an interest rate at 1.75 percentage 
points over LIBOR. 
 
¶2.  (c)  The Prime Minister said that since such conditions 
amounted to a commercial debt that Jordan would have to pay 
back quickly, he would not have the ability to freely use the 
money.  Thus, he had not authorized acceptance of the 
deposit.  He said he instructed Foreign Minister Muasher, who 
is currently visiting Kuwait (reftel), to ask that the 
deposit be turned into a grant or a long-term loan at 
concessional interest rates (he said 25 years at 0.25% 
interest).  We should know more when Muasher returns to Amman. 
GNEHM