This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O.  12958:  DECL: 06-19-13 
TAGS: AMGT CE MV
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 93  (06-19-03) 
 
Classified by Joseph L. Novak, Charge d'Affaires, 
Reasons:  1.5 (b,d) 
 
CONTENTS:  BAIL REFUSED FOR FORMER DEP. DEFENSE MINISTER 
-          NO JAZZ IN JAFFNA 
-          PM SPEECH 
-          VISA REQUEST FOR PROPOSED SRI LANKAN EMBOFF 
 
BAIL REFUSED FOR FORMER DEP. DEFENSE MINISTER 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶1.  (C) FYI:  Former Dep. defense minister (and close 
relative of President Kumaratunga) Anuruddha Ratwatte was 
again refused bail by a Sri Lankan lower court on June 
¶18.  As previously reported, Ratwatte and 14 others 
(including two of his sons) are incarcerated due to their 
alleged involvement in the murder of 10 Muslims that took 
place on election day in December 2001.  The generally 
pro-Kumaratunga Supreme Court had earlier directed the 
lower court to consider the bail applications.  It is not 
clear whether the Supreme Court will intervene to 
overrule the lower court.  (POL) 
 
NO JAZZ IN JAFFNA 
----------------- 
¶2.  (C) FYI.  In preparation for a Mission-planned 
cultural event in Jaffna, our PAO went north on June 18 
to meet with the Additional Government Agent (AGA) and 
tour possible concert venues.  The PAO received a cool 
reception from the AGA, who suggested that the event be 
postponed until September or October from the planned 
July 23 date.  This response was in sharp contrast to a 
June 16 meeting between the AGA and Pol FSN, when the 
idea of the cultural event -- a jazz trio -- was warmly 
received.  The change in attitude from June 16 to June 18 
is most likely due to the Tigers being briefed -- and 
deciding that they did not like the jazz idea.  (Note: 
We don't think the Tigers have anything against Chet 
Baker, per se.  The group, however, has been assiduously 
blocking other efforts to return life in Jaffna to 
normal.  The group, for example, scrubbed the re-opening 
of the Jaffna library earlier this year.)  In any case, 
Public Affairs is relocating the venue to Kandy, which is 
unfortunate because there has not been a USG-sponsored 
cultural event in Jaffna for many a year.  (POL/PAO) 
 
PM SPEECH 
--------- 
¶3.  (SBU) PM Wickremesinghe is slated to give a (pre- 
recorded) national address re the peace process tonight 
(June 19) on national TV.  (Note:  Per yesterday's o/i 
note on this, we had originally been told that the speech 
would consist of old video of the PM's remarks made at 
Tokyo, but it now seems the PM is giving a brand new 
speech.)  We will be in touch with you if he makes any 
dramatic announcements.  (POL) 
 
VISA REQUEST FOR PROPOSED SRI LANKAN EMBOFF 
------------------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) Per our o/i note from June 18 and previous e- 
mail traffic:  In regards to the diplomatic visa for 
Ilankoon Adikari, who the MFA has proposed for a public 
relations slot at the SL Consulate General in Los 
Angeles, we request that this appointment be turned off 
by the SL MFA without our having to reject the 
application.  As was previously mentioned in the June 18 
Desk(Waller) - Post(MWilliams) email, Ambassador 
Subasinghe had offered to "kill" the case.  The 
Department, however, did not think this was necessary at 
the time and had said Colombo could deny the visa if it 
was not justifiable. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In Mission's view, it would be far more 
favorable if the GSL took action on this issue without a 
formal denial from the Consular Section in Colombo. 
Therefore, Mission would request that Ambassador 
Subasinghe be taken up on his offer to "kill" the case. 
This would result in the same outcome, but would be far 
less contentious and not cause unnecessary difficulties 
(which might include the MFA trying to take reciprocal 
measures against us).  (CONS) 
 
NOVAK