This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
308 votes in support of base renovation, 193 votes against - 
Hurriyet 
Ankara Palas Agreement-We'll meet in Baghdat-Milliyet 
Kurdish Groups Promise not to Establish Independent Kurdish 
State-Turkiye 
Historic Decision-Tercuman 
US Adds Germany to its Black List for Opposition to the War 
Against Iraq-Aksam 
Erdogan is Officially a Candidate from Siirt-Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
200 US Troops for Iraq-Cumhuriyet 
Parliament approves first Resolution: US will renovate 
Turkish Bases-Zaman 
Turkey Presses For Peace-Yeni Safak 
Closed session at the Parliament --- Radikal 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: All papers and TV channels gave extensive coverage to 
Parliament voting on the renovation of Turkish bases by the 
US.  Despite fierce protests by the opposition, the 
parliament voted to approve the resolution in a closed 
session by a count of 308 to 193.  44 AKP deputies did not 
support the decision for upgrading the Bases.  Papers note 
that the decision was praised by President Bush, who 
described Turkey as `a brave friend and loyal NATO ally.' 
 
 
"Hurriyet" led with a story about military planning for a 
`third front' in Jordan.  General Aytac Yalman, Commander of 
Turkish Land Forces, recently went to Jordan to represent 
Turkey in a series of official meetings.  The story claims 
that, as part of the long-term plan, there might be a third 
front opened from Jordan in the event that a second front 
from Turkey is approved. 
 
 
Northern Iraq meeting: All papers carry extensive details of 
the meeting in Ankara between Turkey, the US, and 
representatives of Iraqi Kurdish groups (PUK, KDP) and the 
Turkomen.  The importance of Iraq's territorial integrity is 
the main highlight.  "Hurriyet" notes a disagreement on a 
possible post-Saddam structure in Iraq.  Reportedly, Turkey 
and the Turkomen emphasized a strong central authority, 
while the Kurdish groups favor a `loose, federal structure.' 
Papers highlight that the KDP opposes the possible military 
presence of Turkey in northern Iraq, even for the 
humanitarian purposes.  In a statement following the 
meeting, Ali Tuygan, Deputy U/S at the Turkish Foreign 
Ministry, said that efforts to work out a peaceful solution 
to the problem in Iraq will continue.  "Milliyet" reports 
that during the meeting, Tuygan said that Turkish troops in 
the region should be regarded as a friendly force.  He 
warned the Kurdish groups not to try to benefit from Iraq's 
current turmoil.  US special envoy Khalilzad in turn urged 
the Kurdish groups to consider these warnings seriously. 
 
 
John Taylor: Papers and television news highlight the visit 
of US Treasury Undersecretary John Taylor to Ankara. 
Reports speculate that Turkey and the US are about to 
finalize a `compensation plan' for Turkey.  Turkey seeks a 
binding commitment from the US side.  Sedat Ergin of the 
mass appeal Hurriyet argued that Taylor has a concrete plan 
in hand, and that the two delegations will work on the fine 
tuning.  According to his estimate, the US will provide 4 
billion dollars in grants and 10 billion dollars in 
`conditional credits.' 
 
 
Erdogan to run for parliament:  "Hurriyet" reports that AKP 
leader Erdogan applied to the Higher Electoral Board 
yesterday to stand as a candidate in the Siirt election next 
month.  The election could pave the way for Erdogan to win a 
seat in Parliament and take up the post of Prime Minister. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Powell's presentation to the UNSC 
 
 
"Powell proved Washington's determination to strike" 
Sami Kohen wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (2/7): "As 
expected, Secretary Powell's presentation to the UN divided 
world opinion.  Yet those who consider the proof 
`unconvincing' constitute a larger group than those who take 
it as credible evidence.  In addition, the overall majority 
considers the documents not sufficient to justify a war.  In 
fact, what Powell proved with his presentation was the 
determination of Washington to strike Iraq. . Following the 
second report by UNMOVIC to the UNSC, we shall see if there 
will be a second resolution, which would set the legal basis 
for the US military operation." 
 
 
"Cold peace" 
Omer Celik, a deputy from AKP wrote in tabloid Star (2/7): 
"The September 11 events brought a new political era which 
can be called a `cold peace', i.e. the reversal of the cold 
war era's equilibrium.  As can be seen by the US reaction to 
the 9/11 events, the cold peace requires an activist 
approach to protection as well as a new international law 
and order.  In this new era, the world system must be able 
to cope with crises so that the global power equilibrium is 
not shaken.  The clear indication of this danger can be seen 
within the European Union, particularly about their stance 
on the Iraq crisis. . The Iraqi regime failed to comprehend 
the parameters of the cold peace, and neglected to rid 
itself of weapons of mass destruction.  The Iraqi regime has 
completely lost its credibility, especially in view of its 
history of using WMD against Iran and its own people. 
Nobody considers Saddam's regime as legitimate.  Currently, 
the question centers on how to get rid of this regime in 
Iraq. .  The UN has failed to be influential in the crisis, 
and the EU has proven incompetent in its effort to resolve 
it.  Thus the US is inclined to act and use force 
unilaterally.  Actually, Saddam Hussein is doing his best to 
provoke this process.  There is only one option left to stop 
the process: Saddam Hussein must undertake active 
cooperation with the UN." 
 
 
PEARSON