This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL STUDENTS VOICE NUANCED UNDERSTANDING OF 
WAR IN IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Istanbul pol/econoffs hosted a group of 11 
students from Istanbul's Beykent University to discuss 
current political developments in the Middle East and the 
Turkish/U.S. relationship.  The students were unanimously 
opposed to the war.  However, the group demonstrated a 
nuanced understanding of the U.S./Turkish relationship and a 
belief that, though they disagree with the war, the press in 
Turkey and the Middle East has dealt with U.S. policy in a 
sensationalist manner.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) On April 1, Pol/econoffs hosted a group of 11 students 
from newly-established Beykent University's English Language 
Department.  The students (9 women and 2 men) were largely 
interested in pursuing careers in translation, teaching, 
further study in literature, and public relations. 
Geographically, most were raised in Istanbul, though two grew 
up in the Southeast, one on the Black Sea coast, and several 
others lived for many years in the Aegean region.  One of the 
girls wore a headscarf (technically not permitted in 
universities by the Higher Board of Education, but often 
ignored at private universities).  Two of the students were 
dual nationals: one Turkish-American, and one Turkish-Israeli. 
 
 
------------- 
War and Media 
------------- 
 
 
¶3. (U) Though the subject of the war in Iraq took up only a 
portion of the two-hour discussion, students immediately 
stated, unanimously, that they were against the war. 
However, they were quick to distance themselves from any 
sympathy with the Iraqi regime.  In essence, one student 
said, the decision to act without a clearer UN mandate, and 
not give inspections further time, was what they disagreed 
with. 
 
 
¶4. (U) When asked about media coverage in Turkey, students 
acknowledged that the U.S. had been subject to a host of wild 
conspiracy theories.  Students pointed to fanciful press 
articles, such as: allegations that the new consulate's 
location has a darker purpose (one paper suggested that the 
location was perfect for monitoring traffic on the Bosphorus; 
another said flights to Ataturk International Airport would 
be monitored from "the hilltop fortress"); visa and 
immigration policies were specifically anti-Muslim; and U.S. 
interest in Turkey's Southeast is to encourage an independent 
Kurdistan.  Students pointed out that, ultimately, Turks were 
harmed by the sensationalist approach of the media. 
 
 
------------------- 
American Intentions 
------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (U) Poloff asked whether the students believed the United 
States was "well-intentioned" in using military force against 
Saddam.  Most of the students did not offer a clear opinion 
in either direction: one said he believed the American people 
meant well, but that military commanders might be less 
well-intentioned.  Another student said that while she had 
questions about U.S. motives, she knew that "Saddam is no 
saint."  The question of civilian casualties, heavily 
reported in Turkish media, weighed heavily on the students' 
minds. 
 
 
---------------- 
AKP and the Vote 
---------------- 
 
 
¶6. (U) Pointing to the failed Turkish Parliament vote to 
allow U.S. troops to transit Turkey for Northern Iraq, 
several students said AKP's "mismanagement" was to blame for 
the narrow defeat.  Students also pointed to "playing 
politics for too long" as a concern, blaming the military, 
CHP, and AKP for the miscalculation and subsequent damage to 
U.S.-Turkish relations.  At the same time, several students 
said, they believe the long-term U.S.-Turkish relationship 
will remain strong. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶7. (U) Students displayed both a healthy skepticism of local 
press coverage and a nuanced understanding of political 
machinations in Ankara.  Unprompted, the students offered an 
analysis of AK which was highly refined: balancing populist 
promises to their supporters while trying to grapple with 
complex international relationships and economic management. 
While not representative of all segments of Turkish society, 
the students offered a window into Turkish youth's view of 
the war.  End comment. 
ARNETT