This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 001814 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/27/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER ETRD EIND ECON YM ET COUNTER TERRORISM ECON COM
SUBJECT: YEMENI PRESIDENT SALEH VISITS ETHIOPIA; MOVE TO 
INCREASE TRILATERAL COOPERATION AMONG YEMEN-ETHIOPIA-SUDAN 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (c) In a July 27 meeting with the Ambassador, Foreign 
Minister Qirbi said Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh,s 
recent visit to Ethiopia paved the way for increasing 
regional cooperation.  FM Qirbi deemed President Ali Abdullah 
Saleh,s three day trip  successful in terms of strengthening 
Yemeni-Ethiopian coordination on counter-terrorism, as well 
as planning for economic development and increased trade.  He 
claimed that the growing tripartite alliance that includes 
the Sudan is not directed against any country, but is open to 
all and designed to increase economic cooperation among the 
HOA countries.  He also said that settling disputes by 
peaceful means (e.g., in Somalia and the Sudan) would be a 
major function of the alliance.  Noting that the Sudan and 
Ethiopia already have a open trade zone and that the 
Ethiopian market for Yemeni goods (oil and agricultural 
products) is about $120 million, Qirbi said the goal is to 
eventually have a Free Trade Area (FTA) and to develop a 
common market.  The Ethiopian and Yemeni presidents also met 
with businessmen to discuss improving the investment 
environment. 
 
¶2. (c) The Ambassador mentioned General Robeson,s recent 
visit to Yemen (septel), his interest in the HOA, training in 
Yemen and other countries, and the possibility of future 
regional exercises.  He also asked about Kenya,s inclusion 
in the alliance.  According to Qirbi no other specific 
countries or limitations on cooperation were discussed by the 
presidents.  There is interest, however, in developing 
stonger ties to Tanzania given the large Tanzanian population 
in Yemen. 
HULL