This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 003153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, PMAT; OSD FOR ISA AND ISP; JCS 
FOR J5; EUCOM FOR J5, POLAD; CENTCOM FOR J5 AND POLAD; 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/13/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: TURKISH MFA DELEGATION VISIT TO IRAQ:  ITS IN OUR 
INTEREST TO SUPPORT IT 
 
REF: ANKARA 3078 
 
 
(U) Classified by Acting DCM Scot Marciel.  Reasons:  1.5 (B 
and D). 
 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  See para 3. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Reftel reported the MFA's intention to send a 
three-person delegation to Iraq beginning May 15.  The visit 
is in large part in response to past invitations from the KDP 
and PUK for a senior GOT delegation to visit northern Iraq. 
The Turks' overriding objective is to try to resolve some of 
the outstanding issues and to improve relations.  We 
understand the KDP and PUK support this visit, and that KDP 
leader Barzani and PUK leader Talabani (both of whom are in 
Baghdad) have agreed to meet with the delegation in Baghdad. 
During a May 13 meeting with the Ambassador (septel), MFA U/S 
Ziyal requested the Ambassador's assistance in facilitating 
the visit, including arranging meetings with SPE Bremer and 
ORHA's Garner and Moore. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Action request:  The USG has for years been a 
steadfast and vocal supporter of improved Turkish-Kurdish 
relations.  We recognize that conditions on the ground have 
changed.  What has not changed is the tension between Turks 
and Kurds and the impact these tensions could have on larger 
US objectives in Iraq.  USG support for this visit also 
furthers our commitment to transparency and 
information-sharing with Ankara on issues of concern to 
Turkey.  The more the Turks see for themselves the positive 
developments that have taken place in Iraq since the end of 
combat operations -- and the extent to which USG officials on 
the ground can help shape their exposure through meetings -- 
the better able we will be to manage Turkey's future behavior 
vis-a-vis Iraq.  US failure to facilitate the visit -- 
including opposition to the delegation's travel -- will be 
widely interpreted here as evidence that we are not 
interested in transparency with Ankara and will fuel Turkish 
perceptions that we have something to hide in northern Iraq. 
We therefore recommend that Washington agencies endorse the 
GOT's request to visit Iraq and facilitate the visit, 
including arranging USG meetings with the delegation in Iraq. 
PEARSON