This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TPA - DVERNON AND EUR/SE 
 
 
ROME FOR CUSTOMS - R. STIRITI 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT ETRD AMGT TU
SUBJECT:  TURKEY AND THE CONTAINER SECURITY INITIATIVE 
 
Ref:  Sirotic/Stiriti/Vernon Emails/telcons 7/10/03 
 
 
¶1. Customs Rome informed the Embassy (ref emails and 
telcons) that the port of Izmir has been selected for 
inclusion in the second phase of the Container Security 
Initiative.  We further understand that Customs 
Assistant Commissioner Shruhan and Customs Attache 
Stiriti met with GOT counterparts andto discussed CSI in 
February and July 2003, but we have not received any 
front-channel instructions or guidance indicating that 
the USG would be formally approaching the GOT on this 
initiative.neither the Istanbul Consulate nor the 
Embassy were able to send staff to these meetings.  We 
also just learned that understand that Customs has 
proposed to the GOT - prior to informing the Embassy of 
the proposal (let alone initiating the NSDD-38 process) 
- that a U.S. customs officer be stationed in Izmir, 
first for a pilot period of several months, then 
permanently, to implement the CSI. 
 
 
¶2.  The Mission fully supports CSI and is eager to work 
with Washington agencies in securing Turkish cooperation 
in the war on terror, but there are numerous local 
issues to be considered.  We are disappointed that the 
approach to the GOT on this was not coordinated or even 
outlined in any official instruction.  Embassy requests 
Department provide a front-channel message providing 
guidance on this initiative, and also work with U.S. 
Customs to ensure full interagency coordinationfurther 
information on the planned inclusion of Turkey in CSI 
and requests that future approaches to the GOT be 
coordinated with relevant Mission elements.  Pearson