This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 001318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/07/2013 
TAGS: PARM PREL MNUC KSCA ETTC TSPA YM MTCRE DEMARCHE
SUBJECT: ICOC - URGING ADDITIONAL COUNTRIES TO SUBSCRIBE: 
YEMEN 
 
REF: A.STATE 97985 B.STATE 155178 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ALAN MISENHEIMER FOR REASONS 1.5(B) 
 
¶1. (U) On 6/7, Acting Pol/Econ Chief delivered Ref A demarche 
concerning the International Code of Conduct against 
Ballistic Missile Proliferation (ICOC) to Marwan Noman, 
Office Director to Yemen's Foreign Minister. 
 
 ¶2.  (C) Noman was familiar with the issue: the diplomatic 
note that would have added Yemen to the list of ICOC 
signatories had been on his desk in April, ready to pass to 
Foreign Minister Abu-Baker al-Qirbi for signature.  According 
to Noman, the Ministry of Defense objected at the last 
minute, claiming the Code would limit their military options. 
 That objection had trumped, at least for the time being, the 
strong ICOC endorsement given by Amat al-Alim al-Soswah, 
recently named as Minister of Human Rights in the new Yemeni 
cabinet. 
 
 ¶3. (C) Pol/Econ chief reviewed ref B talking points, 
stressing that the ICOC would not affect any legitimate 
defense or space exploration requirements.  Noman promised to 
raise the matter again and said he was optimistic that the 
MOD objections would be overcome and the Foreign Minister 
would sign the ICOC. 
 
¶4. (c) Comment: The view presented to us --  that FM Qirbi 
and the MFA are ready to proceed, while the MOD is hesitant 
-- is credible.  Our MFA contacts say MOD reservations are 
not deeply held and may soon give way.  Nevertheless, such 
inter-ministerial discord often proves difficult for the ROYG 
to resolve.  Post will continue to press on both the MFA and 
the MOD. 
 
MISENHEIMER