This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO PGOV IZ HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 18, 2003 
 
 
¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El Heraldo" on 
7/18 entitled "Tough fight against narco trafficking". 
"Undoubtedly, drug trafficking in Honduras is considerable, as 
shown by the recent drug seizures that have evidenced the 
determination of police authorities against this criminal 
activity that is destroying the lives of millions of young people 
around the world." 
 
"The seizure of more than 2 tons of drugs in the Bay Islands this 
week was a hard hit against drug trafficking, and according to 
the Minister of Security Oscar Alvarez, it demonstrates the 
determination of the Honduran authorities to continue in the 
fight against narco trafficking." 
 
"For that reason, we encourage the police, prosecutors and judges 
to keep their upfront fight against narco traffickers, and don't 
give in to their power and financial resources." 
 
¶2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" on 
7/18 entitled "80 prominent people are being investigated for 
drug trafficking". "Roy Medina, the Honduran General Attorney 
affirmed that more than 100 tons of drugs come through Honduras 
destined to the US, according to the information provided by US 
anti-drug agencies to the US Embassy in Honduras." 
 
"Medina stated that it's evident that a large amount of drugs go 
through Honduras even though it's impossible to determine exactly 
how much, but he acknowledged that US Ambassador Larry Palmer is 
well informed about this issue." 
 
"Medina said, `we are determined to stop drug trafficking and 
that's why we have strengthened our investigation work. Among 
those being investigated, there are 80 renowned narcos that will 
be brought to justice when our investigation is through'." 
 
"About the seizure of 2,000 kilos of cocaine in Roatan after a 
serious warning from the US Embassy, Medina noted, `I believe 
it's just a coincidence, it isn't a direct response for what the 
US Ambassador has recently said'." 
 
 
Palmer