This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PHUM PREF IZ CA AID
SUBJECT: CANADA CONTINUING TO RESPOND TO IRAQ HUMANITARIAN 
NEEDS 
 
REF: A. STATE 104327 B. OTTAWA 1026 C. OTTAWA 1190 
 
¶1. (U) Poloff conveyed the points contained ref A on 
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction of Iraq to Louise 
Marchand, Director General for Humanitarian Assistance at the 
Canadian International Development Agency, and Norman 
Macdonnell, CIDA's Chief of Operations for International 
Humanitarian Assistance, on April 30. Canada has pledged 
C$100 million (approximately U.S. $70 million) to help meet 
humanitarian needs in Iraq (ref B).  CIDA recently announced 
the allocation of a second installment of this funding, in 
the total amount of C$35 million.  This installment will be 
allocated as follows:  United Nations Children's Fund - C$5 
million; World Food Program - C$13 million; Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - C$1 million; 
International Committee of the Red Cross - C$10 million; 
United Nations Security Coordinator - C$1 million; and United 
Nations Mine Action Service - C$5 million. To date, Canada 
has allocated approximately C$60 million of the C$100 million 
earmarked for humanitarian assistance to Iraq. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Marchand indicated Canada's overall approach to 
future Iraq humanitarian spending, and to reconstruction 
efforts in Iraq, will be discussed at a cabinet meeting on 
May 6 (ref C).  Marchand said Canada will pay close attention 
to the Iraq needs assessments being prepared by the World 
Bank, IMF, and U.N. in deciding on its future assistance 
allocations, and that Canada will continue to work through 
U.N. agencies and other international organizations in 
providing assistance. With respect to reconstruction, 
Marchand mentioned  Canada has a particular interest in 
helping with water projects in Iraq, and hopes to work on 
such projects in partnership with an international 
organization such as UNICEF. 
CELLUCCI