This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 003181 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2013 
TAGS: MASS MARR TU
SUBJECT: SEEBRIG ASSURANCES: GOT STRESSES ITS SIGNATURE TO 
AGREEMENT IS FORTHCOMING 
 
 (U)  Classified by Political-Military Counselor Stuart 
Brown.  Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
(C)  On May 12 and 14, Polmiloff spoke with MFA NATO 
Department Second Secretary Oya Ergin to inquire about the 
status of Turkey's anticipated signature of the SEEBRIG 
Assurances.  She informed us that everything is on track and 
that "normal procedures" are in process.  The paper work is 
currently in the Prime Minister's office, awaiting his 
signature for approval.  Polmiloff pressed her to accelerate 
the process, indicating that Washington as well as other 
participants of the Communication Information System (CIS) 
for SEEBRIG are becoming increasingly anxious that deadlines 
will not be met if Turkey does not immediately sign the 
agreement.  Ergin assured us that Turkey views the CIS as 
extremely important and has no problems with the agreement. 
She then continued to say that "it would be wrong to push the 
Prime Ministry or the TGS at this point as they have just 
received the paperwork."   She said she is hopeful the 
process will be completed shortly.  Polmiloff said she would 
convey this message to the Department, but that many in 
Washington were beginning to question Turkey's commitment to 
this project. 
 
 
PEARSON