This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAN (Running) OES/ENV (Matuzak) IO 
(Turak) 
 
GENEVA for Poulton 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID EU IO KSCA AORC CA
SUBJECT: CANADIAN VIEWS ON UNECE EFE MINISTERIAL 
 
REF: SECSTATE 75080 
 
¶1. EST Counselor and EST Specialist made the demarche 
requested in reftel to Jean-Louis Wallace of the 
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 
(DFAIT).  According to Wallace, Canada shares USG 
concerns about the draft Environment for Europe 
ministerial declaration.  Wallace indicated that he and 
others in GoC had been dismayed as the draft 
declaration expanded in scope.  Like the U.S., Canada 
would like to see the declaration deal primarily with 
issues that have broad consensus within the ECE and 
less with issues that only have limited support or that 
apply only to specific UNECE sub-regions. 
 
¶2. Our discussion with Wallace revealed that Canada 
shares nearly every point of U.S. concern noted in 
reftel.  Wallace told EST Counselor and EST Specialist 
that there would be an interagency meeting, including 
DFAIT and Environment Canada, in Ottawa this week at 
which he would bring our demarche up for discussion, 
and he intended to circulate USG talking points to his 
interagency colleagues prior to the meeting to 
facilitate further coordination.  Wallace also told us 
he would be very willing to participate in a conference 
call with U.S. counterparts in the run-up to UNECE 
meetings to coordinate positions. 
 
Cellucci