This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 FRANKFURT 005670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR PDAS RIES, EB BAY, EUR/AGS, AND EUR/ERA 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD 
STATE PASS NSC 
TREASURY FOR DAS SOBEL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR IMI HARLOW, AUSTIN 
PARIS ALSO FOR OECD 
TREASURY FOR OCC RUTLEDGE, MCMAHON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EUN
SUBJECT: Economic Forecast for Germany: Slow Growth and 
High Government Deficits Continue; Deflation Outside 
Risk; Building Confidence is Key 
 
 
T-IA-F-03-37 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Not/not 
for Internet distribution. 
 
REF: Berlin 2415 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary: Our forecast for Germany for this 
year and next is for continued slow growth with a 
modest pick up in 2004 driven by net exports.  While 
1.3% real growth in 2004 might be deemed a "recovery" 
after 0.1% growth in 2003 it is mostly closing a part 
of the output gap that has opened during three years of 
stagnation.  Unemployment will remain in the 10.7% 
range and the government deficit will remain above 3% 
of GDP.  This forecast incorporates possible effects of 
structural reforms announced in the agenda 2010 package 
(reftel), but these are likely to cause a drag on 
growth in their first year of implementation, with 
positive effects following in 2005 and later.  End 
Summary 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Risks to this forecast are principally on the 
downside - that is the balance of risks suggest that 
the actual situation is more likely to worsen than 
improve.  The absence of robust bank lending, weaker 
external demand, faster appreciation of the euro 
against the USD are some of the risks.  Deflation is 
another, which we give only an outside chance of 
materializing next year. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  This forecast incorporates budget data from 
the Government's recently released 2004 budget, 
including bringing income tax cuts a year forward from 
January 2005 to January 2004.  We have not yet 
estimated the possible effects on growth, although 
other estimates range from 0.3 to 0.6 percentage points 
of higher growth.  Stimulus from income tax cuts could 
help offset some of the drag from structural reforms 
but carry other risks, e.g. higher deficits and debt 
service. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Taking a broader view, investment will be a 
key to turning over Germany's growth engine.  Declining 
investment has been a contributing factor to Germany's 
lackluster growth performance in the 1990's. 
Investment growth could be supported by relatively 
lower price and wage increases in Germanythan in its 
euro area partners and lower non-wage labor costs 
promised by structural reforms. Combined with income 
tax reductions, the announcement effect of such a 
comprehensive program on investors as well as consumers 
could be positive.  This, then, would be the upside 
risks to the forecast. 
 
Growth Prospects for 2003 and 2004: Slow Growth, Modest 
Recovery 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Seasonally adjusted real GDP is likely to grow 
slower than previously forecast:  0.1% in 2003, down 
from 0.7% and 1.3% in 2004 down from 1.8%.  The first 
quarter's unexpected   0.2% decline compared to the 
fourth quarter last year has made even modest growth 
improbable for 2003. 
 
¶6. (SBU) After years of flat growth a modest pick up in 
net exports in 2004 should spark growth of 1.3%, hardly 
a recovery as the economy has been stagnating and the 
output gap between actual performance and potential has 
widen.  2004 growth on a non-seasonally adjusted basis 
should improve to 1.8% due to four more working days in 
the calendar year. 
 
Indicators and Sentiment Show No Sign of Recovery 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Business climate indicators do not signal any 
significant upswing.  The ZEW indicator has flattened 
after rising for six months and is still will below its 
historical average.  The ifo index rise in May, the 
first up tick since January, was weak, driven by 
expectations. But the assessment of current economic 
conditions remains poor.  The economic sentiment 
indicator (ESI) for Germany from the EU Business and 
Consumer Survey shows stagnation at a very low level. 
Expectations concerning production, unemployment and 
the general economic situation over next 12 months have 
deteriorated, underpinning our forecast for continued 
stagnation in 2003. 
 
Is there evidence that something will trigger a change 
in current trends? At the moment we do not see any. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The increase in private consumption  in  the 
first  quarter was unique and will not continue in  the 
next  three  quarters (see below).  One factor  driving 
weak  private consumption is a lack of confidence in  a 
better   outlook.   New  paper  reports  suggest   that 
consumers are wary and anxious about high unemployment, 
climbing  social taxes, financial difficulties  of  the 
Government   and   states  and  that  the   operational 
effectiveness of economic politics has declined. 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Recapturing the population's trust will not 
be easy.  The controversy over economic reforms that 
began last September shows no sign of abating.   Clear 
outcomes that could contribute to more confidence , as 
well as a conviction that a comprehensive economic 
program is being put into place, could help restore 
consumers' trust and interest. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  On the business side the sentiment  is  not 
any  better.  Entrepreneurs have been coping with  high 
non-wage labour costs and structural restraints. Agenda 
2010   reforms  should  help  somewhat,  provided   the 
promised  reforms are put into place.   Heated  debates 
over  the reforms, and rumors of possible tax hikes  to 
ease the government budget deficit, put into doubt what 
the government will actually end up doing, contributing 
to  uncertainty  and  delays in  investment  decisions. 
Enterprises  place their hope, once again,  on  foreign 
demand.  Such demand will be only slightly affected  by 
the  euro appreciation as most German exports go to the 
euro area; imports should pick up, leaving a small  net 
trade  surplus to drive recovery in 2003 and  a  larger 
one in 2004. 
 
First Quarter of 2003: False Start - Domestic Demand 
Not Sustainable 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Analysts note that despite the first quarter 
decline, the composition of demand was encouraging. 
Domestic demand grew while net exports declined, a 
potential sign that Germany could begin to grow its own 
way of economic stagnation rather than relying on a 
revival of external demand.  We are not so optimistic. 
 
¶12. (SBU)  First quarter dynamics were attributable  to 
one-off factors that will reverse in the course of  the 
year.   The savings rate was drawn down from  10.6%  to 
10.4% and net disposable incomes were higher due  to  a 
raise  in  entrepreneurial and  interest  income.   Net 
income actually shrank by 0.4% compared to the previous 
quarter  due  to January's increases in  payroll  taxes 
(higher pension contributions (from 19.1% to 19.5%) and 
health insurance (from 14.1% to 14.4%) and higher taxes 
on  petroleum, electricity, (i.e. the next step of  the 
"Eco-tax" reform) and tobacco. 
 
Other elements of domestic demand provide little 
comfort. 
 
¶13. (SBU)  Investment declined significantly by 1.7% in 
the   first  quarter  due  to  a  tremendous  fall   in 
construction  investment. Taking into account  capacity 
utilization,  production and order entries,  investment 
is   unlikely   to  advance  in  the  second   quarter. 
Manufacturing capacity utilization is still  under  its 
long-term average, although the trend is up. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Construction decreased in the first quarter 
by  3.3%  due  in part to the extremely  cold  weather. 
Even  though  the  sector continues  to  work  off  its 
overcapacity, a gleam of hope in the first quarter  was 
an  increase  in  building permits. This  rise  may  be 
attributed  to  the heated political  discussion  about 
cutting housing subsidies, provoking an unusual  amount 
of  applications  for  permits.   Those  with  building 
permits  would be entitled to the subsidy. Low interest 
rates  provide an incentive for immediate  construction 
even  though  the  building permit is  valid  for  five 
years.  Thus, construction in the housing sector should 
rise  in  the  second and third quarters.  Nonetheless, 
continued  reduction  in overall  capacity  will  still 
result in a drag on GDP growth. 
 
Government  consumption, constrained by  rising  budget 
deficits, will remain modest. 
 
The Story is Still External Led Growth 
 
¶15. (SBU)  The base scenario of the forecast remains 
for net exports to drive a gradual recovery in 2004: 
the rest of Euro area - taking 54.7% of German exports 
-- will grow faster than Germany.  Thus, German exports 
are insulated to a significant extent from much of the 
effects of the euro's appreciation.  In nominal terms, 
the euro is up 16.5% against the USD during the first 
half of 2003.  A revival of foreign demand in 2004 both 
inside and outside the euro area should help override 
some of the price effects of more dear euro outside the 
euro area as German exports compete in high-end, 
quality and custom markets and between related firms 
where product substitution is difficult. 
 
Fiscal Deficit: Over Maastricht Threshold 
 
¶16. (SBU)  The Government deficit will climb to 3.9% of 
GDP in 2003.  Revenue is likely to decline as suggested 
by the results of the May tax estimate and our new GDP 
forecast. The result: a fiscal deficit of euro 41 
billion. For 2004 the deficit will continue to be 
driven by revenue losses and draws by social insurance 
programs.  The planned 2004 budget contains euro 15.9 
billion in measures to reduce the deficit to around 
euro 26 billion.  However, bringing forward the income 
tax cut would add another euro 7 billion to the Federal 
deficit and the same amount to the state deficits and 
around euro 2.5 billion deficit at the local levels. 
Thus, the overall government deficit will stay around 
3.8% of GDP.  Germany would neither meet its political 
commitment to reduce the nominal deficit below 3% in 
2003 nor in 2004, the year in which Germany's excessive 
deficit is to be corrected under the rules of the EU 
Stability and Growth Pact. 
 
CPI: Practically Price Stability 
 
¶17. (SBU)  Consumer price increases will remain 
subdued, even declining on a quarterly basis for some 
of the year due to the euro appreciation and lower oil 
prices, but rising overall at an annual average rate of 
0.8% in 2003 and 0.9% in 2004 as demand begins to rise. 
 
¶18.  (SBU)   Consumer prices rose in the first  quarter 
2003  by  0.7% over the previous quarter  and  by  1.1% 
compared  to  a year ago.  In April and in  May  prices 
declined  slightly  on a monthly basis  due  to  strong 
price  declines  in  heating oil and  gas  (oil  prices 
decreased  immediately after the end of the  Iraq  war; 
the price decline was reinforced by Euro appreciation). 
These  effects will continue throughout the year (basis 
effects), partially offset by rises in services prices. 
 
Unemployment: No Cause for Joy 
 
¶19. (SBU)  The number of unemployed will increase by 
9.8% in 2003 and decline by 1.6% in 2004 as economic 
growth picks up.   The unemployment rate will remain 
around 10.7%. 
 
Forecast Risks:  On the Downside 
 
¶20. (SBU)  Risks remain as in the previous forecast, 
principally on the down side: lack of robust bank 
lending, weaker external demand, faster and higher 
appreciation of the euro/USD exchange rate. 
 
¶21. (SBU)  The lack of clear, fully agreed government 
fiscal and reform policies or actions with attendant 
political uncertainties weighs on consumer confidence - 
a factor that could continue into 2004.  Deflation is 
not a feature in our forecast but is an outside risk 
toward the latter part of the forecast horizon, 
particularly if the anticipated upswing does not take 
hold. 
 
A Broader View: Growth, Deflation and Fiscal Expansion 
 
¶22. (SBU)  This forecast has been composed in a period 
of fluidity: the government has announced a major 
structural reform initiative, subsidy cuts, and 
significant tax reductions by bringing forward to 2004 
income tax cuts scheduled for 2005.  This section takes 
a step back and seeks to discern a line of logic in 
these measures that could give a basis for a more 
optimistic scenario than we have assumed. One way to 
look at what is going on is that relatively low 
inflation and structural reforms with tax cuts could 
help counter act the weak investment performance that 
has plagued Germany for nearly a decade. Both these 
mechanisms, structural reforms and relative price 
adjustments, are the "tools" now available to Germany 
in the monetary union to adapt to "shocks" it has 
suffered during reunification. 
 
Why Weak Growth? 
 
¶23. (SBU)  The European Commisson's 2002 "Review of 
Germany's Growth Performance" points to several factors 
that account for Germany's prolonged low growth and 
vulnerabilities to external developments.  Low growth 
stems from weak domestic demand: weak consumption and 
investment, including in the construction sector. 
 
¶24. (SBU)  Large financial transfers to the new states, 
around 4% of GDP annually, initially financed by larger 
deficits, now are financed by higher taxes diverting 
funds from social funds.  These funds, in turn, have 
had to increase their contribution rates.  Higher taxes 
and social charges crowd out private investment as 
expected profits are reduced and adversely effect 
employment, in the Commission's assessment.  Low 
construction investment is the product of working off 
excess capacity in both the new States and the West 
from the heady early 1990 days of reunification and 
high immigration. 
 
¶25. (SBU)  The recently released Bank for International 
Settlements' Annual Report also highlights the decline 
in investment as "the strongest sign (if not cause) of 
the underperformance of the German economy."  The BIS 
believes that while partially cyclical, the low 
propensity to invest is due to fundamental or 
structural factors such as low rates of return, low 
corporate profits, and product and labor market 
rigidities. 
 
¶26. (SBU)  A study by Goldman Sachs suggests that the 
massive cost shock from higher wages in the new states 
and the West associated with reunification encouraged 
firms to substitute capital for labor. Lower 
profitability reduced the incentive to invest. The BIS 
notes that since the early 1990's net investment in 
Germany has fallen sharply.  Goldman Sachs points out 
that compared to 1991 the real level of investment is 
only 6.5% higher in Germany while in the rest of the 
euro area it is 23% higher. In 2001 and 2002 investment 
continued to decline, as we forecast it will this year. 
 
¶27. (SBU)  Lower inflation in Germany relative to that 
in its main European trading partners suggests that its 
external competitiveness will increase, supporting 
exports and growth. This relative price adjustment is 
one way regions experiencing relatively slower economic 
activity in a monetary union can adjust.  Thus, 
relatively lower inflation could benefit Germany. 
However, it also raises the risk of deflation. 
 
The "D" Word 
 
¶28. (SBU)  While we have not found any economists to 
declare that deflation is occurring in Germany, most 
all will admit that there are risks, even the usually 
reserved Bundesbank.  This is playing it safe.  There 
is a general suspicion that, as the BIS explains, "a 
seemingly benign low-inflation environment can turn 
into one with disruptive deflation." Deflation can be 
there before you know it.  Moreover, the costs are 
high, more disruptive than inflation.  Many of these 
adverse effects bear directly on investment. 
 
¶29. (SBU)  One definition of deflation is a decline in 
the general price level on a sustained basis that 
reduces demand.  This definition would rule out the 
more benevolent form of price decreases due to supply 
shocks, like new sources of supply or higher 
productivity, that can drive down prices but contribute 
to faster economic growth. Deflation that is pernicious 
constricts investment: firms hold off investment as the 
real cost of credits increase and profits are squeezed 
because consumers hold off purchases and nominal wages 
are "sticky," keeping production costs higher than 
otherwise. 
 
¶30. (SBU)  It takes more than low inflation to move to 
deflation, but Germany has a number of those other 
necessary attributes.  A growing output gap, weak 
credit growth, and soft equity prices are fertile 
ground in Germany for deflation, according to a recent 
IMF staff assessment. Nonetheless, the IMF paper 
concluded that "mild deflation is likely to take hold" 
but that "the risks of pernicious deflation are low." 
 
¶31. (SBU)  Deutsche Bank research developed its own 
"scoreboard" of 10 indicators that gave Germany a 0.5 
compared to 0.7 in Japan where deflation has taken hold 
and 0.4 in the US.  While they see some negative 
inflation during the year, they give a 20-30% 
probability that deflation could last for more than a 
year, and a lower probability to dangerous deflation 
taking hold.  This would require continued stagnation 
in economic growth, continued low credit growth, a 
substantial further appreciation of the euro to around 
1.40/usd, inflation expectations would have to fall (no 
signs yet that consumers expect lower prices - just 
stable prices) and inflation in the euro area would 
have to fall below 1%. 
 
¶32. (SBU)  This last point is worth noting.  The 
European Central Bank asserts that price developments 
in Germany cannot be considered in isolation from price 
developments in the rest of the EMU.  The ECB considers 
average euro area inflation and pitches its monetary 
policy for price stability, i.e. price increases of 2% 
or less, but still close to 2% to protect against 
possible deflation (this latter point is an important 
clarification recently issued by the ECB).  With Euro 
area inflation still running around 2% and Germany's 
inflation at 0.7%, that means other countries are 
running substantially higher inflation than Germany. 
As noted above, this should improve Germany's 
competitive position within the euro area. 
 
¶33. (SBU)  Deutsche Bank research provides an 
illustrative example.  The posit that if euro area 
inflation were to remain around 2% (the ECB's 
definition of price stability), Germany, with a weight 
of 30% of the monetary union, would have to have 
negative 1% inflation and the rest of the Euro area 
would average 3.5% inflation - a gap of 4.5 percentage 
points.  At such a spread there should be opportunities 
for pricing arbitrage for tradable goods, raising 
demand in Germany. 
 
Role of Fiscal Policy and Reforms 
 
¶34. (SBU)  Another way to counter the price shocks 
adversely affecting investment could be reductions in 
taxes and non-wage labor costs that have restrained 
demand for labor and investment.  The Finance Minister 
has politically linked advancing the income tax 
reductions to adoption of structural reforms and a 
trimmed 2004 deficit that is less than planned 
investment.  In addition, some short-term stimulus to 
economic growth from the tax reductions, estimated to 
range from 0.3-0.6 percentage points, could help offset 
the drag on growth from the early stages of structural 
reforms. 
 
¶35. (SBU)  At a time when there is a risk of deflation 
and confidence is fragile, the Government appears to be 
seeking to take economic matters into its own hands. 
This, Finance Ministry officials agree, should help 
instill confidence in consumers and investors. 
 
¶36. (SBU)  The BIS suggests in its annual report that a 
counter cyclical fiscal policy combined with an 
expansionary monetary policy and other reforms would 
provide a "more potent cocktail" of stimulus to deter 
the threat of deflation.  However, in Germany a recent 
survey (Infratest) suggests, that still 81% of 
respondents were less satisfied or not at all satisfied 
with the government's economic policies.  81% of the 
respondents opposed taking on new debt to pay for 
bringing forward the income tax cuts. This suggests 
that rather than spending the savings from tax 
reductions, many might save them in anticipation of 
higher taxes in the future to help  reduce the debt. 
 
                   Forecast- Germany 
     (Percent Increases - Unless Noted Otherwise) 
 
 
 
 
                    2002         2003        2004 
               ACTUAL     FORECAST  FORECAST 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GDP :                0.2         0.1       1.8 
 
CONSUMPTION:        -0.6         0.5       0.9 
 
GOV. CONSUMPTION:    1.5         0.6       1.2 
 
INVESTMENT:         -6.7        -2.0       1.0 
 
- MACH. & EQUIP.:   -9.4        -0.3       2.7 
 
- CONSTRUCTION:     -5.9        -3.7      -0.9 
- OTHER INVEST.:     2.5         2.2       6.3 
NET EXPORTS:        51.1        -6.5       8.6 
 
- EXPORTS:           2.6         3.0       5.9 
 
- IMPORTS:          -2.1         4.5       5.6 
 
NOM. GDP:      2108.2      2127.2    2174.0 
(Euro Bill) 
 
CURRT. ACCT.        48.9        44        59 
(Euro Bill) 
 
PRICES:              1.3          0.8        0.9 
 
EMPLOYMENT           38,689      38,156     38,300 
(Thousands) 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT         4,071       4,470      4,400 
(nat. definition) 
(Thousands) 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE     9.8         10.7       10.6 
(Pct; nat. def.) 
 
TOTAL FISCAL BALANCE:  -3.8        -3.9      -3.8 
(Pct. GDP) 
 
 
BODDE