This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ADANA 0039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          FEBRUARY 4, 2003 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for February 4, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  SIIRT ELECTIONS MIGHT BE CANCELLED DUE TO IRAQ 
WAR 
(Hurriyet)  A possible U.S.-led war in Iraq has 
overshadowed the March 9 Siirt elections, which was 
expected to open the way for AK Party leader Recep 
Tayyip Erdogan's premiership.  The Higher Election 
Council might "postpone the elections due to de 
facto incapability" if Turkey enters war. 
 
 
¶3.  TURKISH ARMED FORCES START REPAIR PROJECTS IN 
BASES 
(Radikal)  Following the recent site surveys by a 
team of U.S. experts of Turkish bases and ports, 
the Turkish Armed Forces has unilaterally started 
repair projects (to upgrade these bases and ports). 
Preparations are underway at the Incirlik (Adana) 
Air Base and the Diyarbakir Airport, which will 
reportedly initially be used in the event of an 
operation against Iraq.  The U.S. will meet the 
needs during a possible operation.  On February 3, 
a C-5 Galaxy plane landed at Incirlik, where the 
U.S. is stockpiling military equipment and 
materials.  A missile-like object and crates of 
spare parts from the giant cargo plane were 
uploaded on to two trucks.  The trucks later went 
to a nearby warehouse.  In addition, the number of 
KC-135 tanker planes at Incirlik has increased. 
 
 
¶4.  TURKEY, THE U.S. WILL ESTABLISH 15 CAMPS 
(Hurriyet/Milliyet/Turkiye)  Possible immigration 
(from Iraq) was discussed during recent evaluations 
held between Turkey and the U.S.  To prevent a wave 
of immigration, 15 different camps will initially 
be established in northern Iraq.  The number of 
these camps might rise to 23 if immigration 
increases.  The U.S. Time Magazine wrote that 
Turkey and the U.S. had agreed to establish 17 
refugee camps in the region, including 10 on the 
Iraqi side, if an operation started against Iraq. 
 
 
¶5.  SPECIAL TEAMS WILL BE WORKING IN CAMPS 
(Turkiye/Milli Gazete)  Officials have determined 
the names of nearly 1,000 people who will be 
working in tent cities to be established in 
northern Iraq in the event of a war against Iraq. 
The Diyarbakir Security Directorate will dispatch a 
team of 70 specialists to the border.  Efforts are 
also underway to prepare a 1,000-person list of 
health, Tele-com, and Village Affairs Directorate 
personnel in Diyarbakir, Mardin, Sirnak, Batman, 
Hakkari, and Van.  Also, the Diyarbakir National 
Education Directorate has produced a list of 200 
teachers to serve in these tent cities. 
 
 
¶6.  DISPATCH OF TROOPS TO IRAQI BORDER CONTINUES 
(Hurriyet/Milli Gazete)  The Turkish Armed Forces 
is dispatching additional troops and military 
equipment, including armored vehicles, to its units 
along the (Iraqi) border.  Security units have been 
warned against possible terrorist infiltration, and 
thermal cameras along the 280-km Turkish-Iraqi 
border are being checked.  Some banks and public 
organizations have established mobile units.  The 
number of tents set up by the Red Crescent has 
reached 300.  Four other tents were set up to store 
humanitarian assistance.  Cumhuriyet reported that 
troops, military equipment, and materials left 
Tekirdag, Adapazari, Ankara, and Istanbul are being 
kept in Sanliurfa for dispatch to the Southeast 
after the February 11-14 Sacrifice Holiday.  Bolu 
and Kayseri commando teams, which had been used 
during the anti-terror period in the Southeast, 
might also be dispatched to the region again. 
 
 
¶7.  "THERE ARE NO STANDARD SHELTERS IN TURKEY" 
(Turkiye/Bolge)  In line with an order from the 
Civil Defense Directorate General, the Malatya 
Civil Defense Directorate held a civil defense 
seminar.  In his speech, Malatya Civil Defense 
Director Ibrahim Ozay said his directorate was 
organizing activities in accordance with the 
possibility of a war that might break out as a 
result of the tension between the U.S. and Iraq. 
Ozay noted that there are no shelters built in 
accordance with the standards.  He added that, in 
case of an emergency, the basement of public 
buildings, car parks, aparmant buildings, and 
business centers would be used as shelters.  In 
addition, a meeting entitled "Effects of Chemical 
and Biological Agents" was held in Adana's 
Physicians' Chamber.  In his speech, Assistant 
Professor Ferdi Tanir of Cukurova University 
(Adana) said that not all shelters would save lives 
because the province's shelters are insufficient. 
Tanir stressed that shelters must be in an 
appropriate location and have necessary equipment 
to protect against chemical gases. 
 
 
¶8.  MERSIN BUSINESS LEADER AGAINST WAR 
Dunya reported that Mersin businessmen are 
concerned over a possible U.S.-led war in Iraq. 
Musa Timur, President of the Mersin Industrialists 
and Businessmen's Association (MESIAD), voiced 
opposition to a possible war, claiming that the 
provincial economy fell from the fifth province to 
the 19th on a nationwide list.  "It feels like 
bombs dropped on Iraq have fallen on Mersin.  A new 
war will cause the Mersin economy to hit the 
bottom," he added. 
 
 
¶9.  PRO-OCALAN PROTESTS CONTINUE 
(Evrensel)  Demonstrations were held in Igdir, 
Hakkari, Batman, and Sanliurfa to protest the nine- 
week isolation of jailed KADEK/PKK leader Abdullah 
Ocalan.  In Tunceli, relatives of prisoners and 
inmates began a hunger strike.  In addition, a pro- 
Ocalan campaign was launched in Bismil 
(Diyarbakir).  Under the campaign, demonstrations 
will be held every day until February 15.  Also, 
pro-Ocalan marches were held in Diyarbakir's six 
different districts on February 3.  Pro-Ocalan 
slogans were shouted during the marches, while 
police did not intervene. 
 
 
¶10.  NO PERMISSION FOR ANTI-WAR PRESS CONFERENCE IN 
DIYARBAKIR 
(Evrensel)  The Diyarbakir Governor's Office 
refused to grant permission for a press conference 
which the Diyarbakir Democratic Youth Platform 
wanted to organize in protest of a possible U.S.- 
led operation against Iraq and prison isolation. 
When a group of 200 people, including women and 
HADEP Youth Commission members, insisted on holding 
the press conference, police told HADEP officials 
that it was unlawful to hold a press conference and 
wanted them their demonstration.  Some members of 
the group instead staged a sit-down demonstration 
and shouted pro-KADEK/PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan 
slogans.  Then, police intervened to disperse them. 
During the scuffle, many people were reportedly 
injured and over 20 others arrested. 
 
 
¶11.  TEACHERS INVESTIGATED FOR ATTENDING A RALLY 
(Evrensel)  Under Article 130 of the Law number 
657, the Diyarbakir National Education Directorate 
has launched an administrative investigation 
against sixty local teachers, all members of the 
State Employees' Union Confederation (KESK).  The 
investigation stemmed from the teachers' 
participation in the August 2002 KESK rally in 
Ankara.  The law requires public employees to 
receive official permission for travel outside 
their province.  The Diyarbakir Egitim-Sen teachers 
union President, Abdullah Demirtas, called the 
investigation "arbitrary." 
 
 
¶12.  OHAL CIRCULAR STILL IN EFFECT 
(Evrensel)  The former government of Bulent Ecevit 
had published a circular to prevent the 
reinstatement of public employees transferred from 
the State of Emergency (OHAL) region.  Following 
the lifting of OHAL, former Diyarbakir teacher 
Abdurrahim Kutlu petitioned the Diyarbakir 
Governor's Office to be reinstated.  However, the 
Governoer's Office, presumably based on the 
circular, refused to process Kutlu's petition, 
saying "it was inconsistent with the regulation." 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶13.  SYRIA WELCOMES PROPOSED MARKETS ALONG THE 
BORDER 
(Turkiye)  AK Party Kilis Deputy Hasan Kara, who 
had accompanied State Minister Kursad Tuzmen during 
his trip to Syria, said the Syrian government 
favored the idea of establishing open-air markets 
or free zones along the Turkish-Syrian border. 
During the trip aimed at increasing economic 
cooperation between the two countries, the Turkish 
delegation had met with the Syrian Prime Minister, 
as well as seven ministers. 
HOLTZ