This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Turkey, U.S. to sign economic, political, military deals 
soon - Milliyet 
No anti-aircraft missiles to Kurds - Hurriyet 
Constitutional guarantees for Turkomen - Aksam 
Turkey's Baghdad embassy evacuated, border closed - Turkiye 
Patriots, U.S. cargo vessels in Turkey,  - Vatan 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Parliament to vote for `war' - Cumhuriyet 
The parliament's ordeal - Yeni Safak 
Barzani: U.S. should stop Turkey - Zaman 
U.S. to transfer troops to Turkey March 3 - Radikal 
TGS considering emergency rule, martial law - Radikal 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Approaching war paralyzes Turkish markets - Dunya 
Long-term stay in Iraq for thousands of U.S. troops - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: The parliament will reportedly vote on Thursday on the 
issue of deployment of foreign troops in Turkey.  AKP leader 
Erdogan expects 348 deputies to vote in support of the 
motion, while some papers expect a significant number of AKP 
deputies to stand against it. Erdogan and Prime Minister Gul 
will continue efforts to convince MPs.  Erdogan has told 
deputies that President Bush vowed to give Turkey written 
guarantees to secure Turkish support.  AKP leaders are 
expected to warn deputies that without U.S. support, 
Turkey's economy would not be able to carry the prospective 
$30 billion burden the war might bring.  Papers report 
President Sezer as saying during his meeting with the 
Parliamentary Speaker Arinc on Wednesday that the parliament 
should wait for a new UNSC decision.  Reports claim that 
Sezer and Arinc prefer two separate motions for discussion 
in parliament - one for deployment of foreign troops on 
Turkish soil, and the other for sending Turkish troops 
abroad.  Minister of Defense Gonul said Turkey should take 
its place in the operation against Iraq, or face the loss of 
U.S. support in seeking EU membership and a solution in 
Cyprus.  The National Security Council (NSC) will convene on 
Friday to discuss Iraq and Cyprus.  The government is uneasy 
about TGS intentions to declare emergency rule and martial 
law in the event of a war.  Ankara has agreed with the U.S. 
that Kurdish groups will not be given heavy weaponry, and 
that Turkish troops will set up a security belt about 20 km 
deep inside northern Iraq.  The U.S. and Turkey have also 
agreed that the Turkomen will be given a role in a post-war 
Iraq administration.  The deal also foresees $6 billion in 
grants for Turkey, and $24 billion in loans.  Papers 
criticize the government for working out a `feeble' 
financial deal with the U.S.  If the decree is approved by 
the parliament on Thursday, the U.S. will begin deploying 
troops and equipment to Turkey on March 3.  Patriot defense 
missiles have arrived in Turkey from the Netherlands, and 
Turkey has withdrawn its ambassador to Baghdad.  The border 
with Iraq has been closed.  (NOTE: Parliament voted on 
Thursday afternoon to delay until Saturday the debate on 
allowing U.S. troops on Turkish territory.  AKP leader 
Erdogan had announced yesterday that the issue would be 
handled by the parliament on Thursday.) 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: US-Turkey on Iraq 
 
 
"Rejection of US troops would still drag Turkey into war" 
Ertugrul Ozkok wrote in mass appeal Hurriyet (2/27): 
"Characterizing the pending parliamentary decision as a 
choice between war and peace is a historical distortion of 
the facts.  The parliament will vote on whether to allow the 
stationing of American troops in Turkey, as well as sending 
our troops to abroad. .  The fact of the matter is that 
regardless of the Turkish parliament's decision, there is no 
possibility of stopping the war from happening.  Thus Turkey 
should ask the following question to itself: Can Turkey stay 
out of the war if the parliament declines permission? . I 
will be very clear on this matter: The rejection of the 
permission by the Turkish parliament will only pave the way 
for Turkey's full engagement in the war.  When Turkey tries 
to stay out of it, developments in the region take place 
completely out of Turkey's control and influence, which will 
eventually force Turkey to engage in an armed conflict in 
northern Iraq.  The final chance for Saddam to work for a 
peaceful settlement will be available when Turkey decides to 
allow the US to open a northern front.  This is the only way 
to show the insane dictator that the situation is indeed 
serious. . If Turkey decides to stay out of it, there will 
be a very high cost for us to pay in the next 50 years." 
 
 
"Turkey's future requires a `yes' to the decree" 
Fikret Ertan wrote in Islamic-intellectual Zaman (2/27): 
"Evidently the military power that Iraq has built is not 
only the responsibility of the US but also the European 
countries, mainly Germany and France.  Yet that bad record 
does not justify a debate on the legitimacy of an operation. 
The future of Turkey is a more important and genuine issue 
than the legitimacy debate, which remains a theoretical 
discussion. . The fact is that Turkey's situation today and 
in the future is directly linked with the approval of the 
parliamentary decree [allowing US troops into Turkey].  The 
parliamentarians should think and act with responsibility." 
 
 
"We are going to war" 
Can Dundar argued in mass appeal Milliyet (2/27): "This is 
like raping a girl, i.e. Iraq.   And the rapist, i.e. the 
US, is trying to convince us about the legitimacy of its 
action.  We are given assurances that it is going to be 
something enjoyable.  In fact, our role is like holding the 
girl's arms while she is being raped. . It is so sad to see 
the AKP leadership working to attain permission for the 
deployment of American troops.  They are acting under 
threats and blackmail from Washington, and threats from 
President Bush himself.  Bush clearly told Ministers Yakis 
and Babacan that without Turkey's permission for US troops, 
Turkey would suffer the consequences: the US acting together 
with northern Iraqi Kurds; the termination of IMF support; 
and the passage of an Armenian resolution in the Congress. 
In sum, he advised the Turkish ministers to `go back home 
and pass the permission from parliament.'  We have been 
living under the shadow of the very same blackmail: a 
Kurdish state, Armenian resolution etc. The fact of the 
matter is that the US will leave eventually, and Turkey will 
have to live side by side with Kurds and Armenians.  If we 
manage to take this trump card from the US hands, we can 
possibly overcome this dilemma.  It is possible to turn the 
region into a center of attraction where everybody -Turks, 
Kurds, Armenians and Arabs- live together in harmony and 
brotherhood.  This is the only way not to bow to the 
aggression for the sake of pennies." 
 
 
PEARSON