This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000708 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR IZ GT
SUBJECT: PORTILLO PLEDGES UNCONDITIONAL SUPPORT IN 
DIFFICULT TIMES 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) President Alfonso Portillo sent the Ambassador a 
letter (text below) on March 17 expressing consideration for 
the difficult situation facing the U.S. and offering 
Portillo's personal unconditional support for the Ambassador 
and Embassy staff.  Written without explicit reference to 
Iraq, we interpret the letter to offer GOG cooperation to 
ensure the safety of U.S. mission employees in Guatemala, 
should it be necessary.  SepTel discusses Portillo's 
conversation in which he told the Ambassador Guatemala would 
issue a specific statement of support on Iraq.  In that 
conversation, Portillo said he had sent President Bush a 
letter similar to the March 17 letter to the Ambassador. 
 
¶2.  (U) Text of Letter:  Dear Ambassador: 
 
I am very aware of the difficult moment facing the world, and 
the heavy and historic responsibility that the United States 
of America has shouldered.  We are all gravely concerned but 
we have faith in God that all will pass according to your 
plans. 
 
As President of the Republic and as a citizen, I offer my 
services in any instance in which I can be useful.  Above all 
I would like you to know that you will have my unconditional 
support for anything you or your staff require. 
 
With faith in God, I hope we do not arrive at a situation of 
insecurity in Guatemala, but regardless, I pledge the 
unconditional support of my Government for you and your staff. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Alfonso Portillo. 
 
End Text. 
HAMILTON