This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
TAGS: PREL PINS IZ VM
SUBJECT:  MORE PROTESTS OVER IRAQ 
 
REF:  A. HANOI 396  B. HCMC 157  C. USUN 413 
 
¶1.  (U)  On February 19, the national Youth Federation and 
the Hanoi Youth Federation jointly sponsored a rally at the 
Hanoi Medical University opposing war in Iraq and expressing 
solidarity with the people of Iraq.  According to press 
reports, more than 1,000 students and young people from a 
variety of institutions took part (although press photos 
indicated a hefty component of middle aged or older 
participants at least in the front rows).   The rally, like 
similar ones in Hue and Ho Chi Minh City also on February 
19, received prominent media coverage.  The Vietnam Lawyers 
Association separately expressed support for a political 
solution to the Iraq issue in conformity with the UN Charter 
and international law. 
 
¶2.  (U)  The youth meeting in Hanoi passed a resolution 
proclaiming that "Vietnamese youth oppose war against Iraq" 
and calling on people around the world to make every effort 
to "protect peace."  Participants also insisted the "US and 
U.K. stop military action against Iraq" and "respect the 
independence and sovereignty" of Iraq.   One speaker 
denounced the "military pressure" of "US authorities" on 
Iraq and threats to "world peace and stability." 
 
¶3.  (U)  Vietnamese media also gave prominent coverage to 
pro-inspections, anti-war comments by the Vietnamese deputy 
permanent representative to the United Nations at the 
Security Council on February 18 (ref c). 
 
¶4. (U)  Comment:  The language used at this "mass" rally was 
almost identical to expressions from similarly organized 
demonstrations on February 18 (refs a and b), further 
indicating the centrally-directed nature of the "protests" 
and the likelihood that other mass organizations will follow 
suit in the coming days.  Embassy's requests to meet with 
student unions in Hanoi have been politely rebuffed by the 
central Youth Federation since October 2002.  It is another 
telling indicator of the Leninist top-down nature of this 
system that the leaders of the national Youth Federation are 
in the 30s and 40s, and the leaders of most university 
student unions appear to be 20ish lecturers rather than 
actual students. 
BURGUARDT