This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  VATICAN 004211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE LEVIN; NEA/RA; IO/UNP; IO/PHO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: IZ PREL VT
SUBJECT: IRAQ: VATICAN CONCERNED BY LACK OF NECESSITIES; 
SUPPORTS U.S. DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS 
 
REF: A. A) VATICAN 2578 
 
     ¶B. B) VATICAN 3185 
     ¶C. C) VATICAN 3847 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Jim Nicholson for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
------ 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Holy See Deputy Foreign Minister Parolin told Embassy 
September 11 that the Papal Nuncio in Baghdad believed the 
continued lack of "basic necessities" amongst the general 
population was generating an increasingly hostile reaction 
towards coalition forces.  Parolin welcomed U.S. efforts to 
broaden the international community's activity in Iraq, and 
noted the crucial role the Holy See feels moderate Arab 
countries could play in the reconstruction process.  The Holy 
See is continuing its efforts to expand its dialogue with the 
Islamic world, engaging moderate Muslim groups that it hopes 
can counterbalance more radical influences.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Lack of Necessities Provoking Ire of Iraqis 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) DCM and EUR/WE Deputy Director Hernandez met September 
11 with Holy See Deputy Foreign Minister Pietro Parolin and 
US Affairs Office Director Paolo Gualtieri as part of 
Hernandez's orientation trip to the Holy See.  Asked what the 
Holy See was hearing from its Nuncio in Baghdad, Parolin said 
the Nuncio was increasingly concerned by the continuing lack 
of "basic necessities" in Iraq, which he believed was 
provoking a hostile reaction from Iraqis towards coalition 
forces.  Shortages of water, electricity, some foodstuffs, 
and medical services, combined with a continuing sense of 
insecurity, were leading to bubbling discontent, which people 
then blamed on the American forces.  DCM responded that the 
U.S. was working flat out to restore and in many cases 
improve basic services, but that sabotage and the poor state 
of the preexisting infrastructure had hindered this effort. 
Noting that the President had just requested an additional 87 
billion dollars for Iraqi reconstruction, he emphasized that 
the U.S. was determined to address the problems, but needed 
the full support of the international community. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
UNSCR / More International Cooperation the "Right Idea." 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3. (C) Turning to efforts in New York to secure a new UN 
Security Council Resolution and increased international 
participation in Iraq, Parolin said the U.S. had the "right 
idea."  The Holy See would like to see broad international 
oversight and cooperation, but with Iraqis in the lead on 
reconstruction efforts as much as possible.  Parolin said he 
understood the US wanted to maintain its leadership role in 
Iraq, but urged the US to continue efforts to "find unity" 
and further cooperation in the international community.  DCM 
pointed out that the U.S. goal is to turn as much authority 
as possible to the Iraqi people as soon as possible, but that 
this had to be done in a way which would ensure stability and 
security in Iraq. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Engagement with the Islamic World 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The Deputy Foreign Minister also stressed the 
importance of deepening the  involvement of "moderate Arab 
countries" in Iraqi reconstruction and security efforts.  The 
Holy See regards these countries as an indispensable resource 
in the effort to stabilize Iraq.  For its part, the Vatican 
continues to look for any and every opportunity for dialogue 
with willing interlocutors from the Islamic world.  Dialogue 
"is the only way," Parolin said.  He explained that the Holy 
See was trying to work with moderate Islamic elements in the 
hopes that they might convince their more radical 
coreligionists to adopt a more moderate and peaceful 
interpretation of Islam.  Parolin pointed out that the 
non-hierarchical structure of Islam made it difficult to find 
interlocutors who were willing to talk and would have an 
impact on others.  But he said the Vatican had had some 
success in such dialogue, pointing to efforts in Indonesia as 
an example. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
COMMENT: Holy See Staying Engaged with Islam 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C)  The Vatican has a keen interest in the well-being of 
Iraq's Christian (mostly Chaldean Catholic) population, which 
makes up approximately 2 percent of Iraq's population. 
Parolin reiterated the Vatican's fears that the establishment 
of a hard-line Islamic government in Iraq could lead to 
repression of Iraq's Christians (ref a, b).  This particular 
interest, however, is only a part of the Vatican's broader 
interest in dialogue with the Arab world to overcome 
religious intolerance.  For example, ref c noted the 
potential for Vatican engagement with Iran -- with whom it 
maintains an active diplomatic dialogue -- to temper its 
interference in Iraq.  Likewise, the Vatican-sanctioned 
Catholic NGO Sant' Egidio is also continuing its efforts to 
promote Christian-Muslim dialogue (septel).  In Iraq and 
elsewhere, we can continue to count on the Holy See as a 
useful ally in promoting moderation, tolerance, and 
understanding. 
 
Nicholson 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2003VATICA04211 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL