This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/NGA, EUR/SE AND PRM/ANE 
DEPT PASS TO USAID FOR OFDA 
BAGHDAD FOR IRAQI ASSISTANCE CENTER 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT:  Humanitarian Assistance Update:  UN and Energy 
Shipments Flowing but New Restriction on U.S. Citizen 
Crossings 
 
Ref:  Ankara 4251 
 
 
¶1. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
 
¶2.  The World Food Program, Kellogg, Brown and Root, and 
Delta Petroleum advise that food and fuel supplies 
continue to flow across the Habur border crossing into 
Iraq.  Noting good cooperation with the GOT, WFP reports 
that Turkey is still the leading source of food 
procurements and still an important transit corridor for 
shipments to Iraq.  However, following the July 4 
incident in Iraq, the MFA has instituted a diplomatic 
note requirement for U.S. citizens seeking entry into 
Iraq from Turkey.  End Summary. 
 
 
World Food Program 
------------------ 
 
 
¶3. (U) Mission Disaster Relief Officer (MDRO) and 
Environmental Specialist called on Taieb Essayem, the 
World Food Program's Emergency Coordinator in Ankara, on 
July 16 to discuss WFP shipments to Iraq.  Essayem told 
us that, through July 3, WFP has delivered 1.2 million 
tons of food to Iraq through neighboring countries.  Of 
this, 450,000 tons have been sent through Turkey, which 
remains the largest aid corridor in tonnage terms. 
Essayem stated that food transport is slowing down now 
that WFP is procuring food in Iraq.  Other aid corridors 
are increasing in relative importance given that 
northern Iraq's warehouses are relatively full.  Turkey 
remains a leading supplier to the organization as well, 
with USD 55.6 million (125,000 tons) of food bought in 
Turkey in 2003.  Spending on transport, milling and 
other expenses brings the total spent in Turkey to USD 
95 million. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Essayem emphasized that the GOT has been very 
cooperative in this operation, and noted that the WFP 
and the GOT signed an agreement giving WFP diplomatic 
status during the week of July 7.  He reported that the 
Habur crossing is now open 24 hours daily.  However, 
local authorities on the Iraqi side are charging WFP 
fees of USD 5 for each 100 liters of fuel that truckers 
bring with them on their return to Turkey and charges 
WFP a fee of USD 20 per entering truck. 
 
 
Fuel Aid and Trade 
------------------ 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Energy supplies continue to flow to Iraq from 
Turkey.  Delta Petroleum, a Turkish company which has 
entered in an energy barter arrangement with SOMO, the 
Iraqi state oil company, told us on July 15 that it has 
transported 19,668 tons of gasoline and 6,658 tons of 
liquid petroleum gas from Turkey to Iraq.  It has also 
moved 34,996 tons of fuel oil in the opposite direction. 
Kellogg, Brown and Root Operations Manager Kurt Meyer 
told us that KBR has bought 220 million liters of 
benzine and 42,000 metric tons of LPG in Turkey for Iraq 
(valued at USD 90 million) to date.  Meyer confirmed 
that Habur is now open on a 24-hour basis. 
 
 
Diplomatic Note Now Required 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) MFA advised us on July 16 that it would now 
require a diplomatic note from the Embassy for all U.S. 
citizens crossing into Iraq, including USG contractors 
and private citizens.  KBR advised that they were 
unaware of the change in policy.  A U.S. military 
officer from the Incirlik base was turned back at the 
Habur crossing July 16. 
Pearson