This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 007308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ENRG ETRD IZ PREL TU
SUBJECT: BOOSTING TURKISH ELECTRICITY EXPORTS TO IRAQ 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified -- Not For Internet Distribution 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) In response to Secretary Powell's request that 
Turkey look for ways to assist Iraq's reconstruction, 
beginning last September, a Turkish company began exporting a 
small amount (50MW) of electricity to Iraq.  The operator, 
Karadeniz Energy, has rehabilitated existing transmission 
lines at the Turkey/Iraq border and expects soon to increase 
the deliveries to 180 MW.  According to Turkish officials, 
Turkey has considerable excess capacity and is very 
interested in boosting electricity sales to Iraq.  However, 
further increases are not possible in the near term because 
there are not adequate transmission lines. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Embassy has learned that AIG and the Washington 
Group are separately interested in projects to build and/or 
upgrade transmission lines and substations to Iraq.  The 
Washington Group has consulted with Iraqi and Turkish 
officials and a group of Turkish power companies to 
build/upgrade transmission lines to export as much as 1,400 
MW of additional power to Iraq. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Embassy believes this idea is worth exploring.  We 
recommend that appropriate Washington agencies invite the 
companies to brief on their plans and determine whether 
further discussion would be appropriate at the bilateral EPC 
in Washington, December 2-3, 2003. 
EDELMAN