This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON ETRD CE ECONOMICS
SUBJECT: WI-FI SURVEY, SRI LANKA 
 
REF: STATE 85946 
 
Â¶1.  Post response to reftel Wi-Fi survey request 
follows: 
 
A)  Has host country allocated unlicensed radio- 
frequency spectrum for use by Wi-Fi and similar 
wireless technologies or is it planning to do so?  If 
so are there separate allocations for indoor and 
outdoor use?  Alternatively, is host country planning 
to authorize Wi-Fi services as low-power devices 
without a specific radio-service allocation? 
 
--  At the moment Wi-Fi is a licensed service and 
allowed in the 2.4GHz and 2.43GHz band.  Sri Lanka 
has not allocated unlicensed radio frequency spectrum 
for Wi-Fi or any similar technologies. 
 
--  Sri Lanka is planning to allocate the full 2.4GHz 
ISM band for indoor and part of 2.4GHz ISM band for 
outdoor use with certain power level restrictions in 
both categories. 
 
--  Telecommunications authorities are exploring the 
possibility of making this license-exempt either for 
private or commercial use or both.  But no decision 
has been made yet. 
 
B)  Can Wi-Fi systems be used without a license in 
host country?  If licenses are required what briefly 
are the licensing procedures? 
 
--  Presently, Wi-Fi systems cannot be used without a 
license.  The applicant should forward an application 
form with the copy of specifications.  If technical 
details are satisfactory, approval will be given and 
an annual license is issued upon the payment of a 
fee. 
 
C)  Can Wi-Fi systems be used for commercial purposes 
without a license? 
 
No 
 
D)  Are there any commercial Wi-Fi networks that 
provide service to the public currently operating in 
host country? 
 
Yes 
 
E)  Can post provide any examples of how Wi-Fi is 
currently being used in host country?  We are 
particularly interested in developing country 
examples that demonstrate how Wi-Fi can be used to 
create digital opportunity and address social and 
economic challenges. 
 
-- Currently, the Telecommunications Regulatory 
Commission does not permit unlicensed operation in 
2.4GHz band.  License operators are permitted to use 
802.2 lb equipment with 30 MHz slot from 2.4 GHz to 
2.43 GHz on shared basis.  The licensees fall into 3 
groups. 
 
-- 1.  Four facility-based data operators are using 
this and other technologies to provide public 
(commercial) data services, primarily Internet 
access.  The maximum allowable output power for this 
category is limited to 1 Watt.  This is for longer 
distance outdoor applications. 
 
-- 2.  Four other large organizations are authorized 
to use the same 30Mhz band with a maximum power of 
100mW.  These users are permitted to use external 
antenna and allowed to transmit within their 
premises. 
 
-- 3.  Other small users are allowed to use this 
equipment within (the above mentioned) 30Mhz band 
with a maximum power of 100mW and are not permitted 
to use other antennas except the original equipment 
antennas. 
 
F)  We welcome whatever additional information about 
Wi-Fi related host country developments that post 
believes might be helpful.  Such information could 
include: Is Wi-Fi in use in rural areas?  If so how 
is "backhaul" connectivity provided to the Wi-Fi 
system (i.e., via satellite, DSL lines, cable TV 
networks)? Are there any longer distance (beyond 100 
meters outdoors) Wi-Fi networks in use in-country? 
How many Wi-Fi units have been sold in host country? 
-- The usage in rural areas is very limited.  The 
backhaul connectivity is normally through DSL lines. 
WILLS