This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GENEVA FOR USTR - ALICIA GREENIDGE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD CA USTR
SUBJECT: WTO SERVICES NEGOTIATIONS: CANADA WILL MEET THE 
OFFER DEADLINE 
 
REF: STATE 49634 
 
¶1. (U) This message is sensitive but unclassified; please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Canada will submit its services trade offer by the 
March 31 deadline, according to Department of Foreign Affairs 
and International Trade Director General Suzanne Vinet. 
Vinet told EconCouns on February 26 that the Canadian offer 
was "all but completed," and said she did not expect the 
United States to be surprised by the fact that health care, 
education and cultural services would be largely absent from 
the Canadian offer. 
 
¶3. (SBU) EconCouns subsequently discussed Canada's views on 
modalities with Multilateral Trade Deputy Director Allison 
Young on February 28.  Young said she had checked with the 
Canadian delegation in Geneva that morning, and it looked as 
though only Bulgaria was still raising concerns about the 
Chairman's text on modalities.  She said Canada hopes the 
modalities will be accepted at next week's special session of 
the Negotiating Group on Services and is ready to work toward 
that end. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Neither Young nor Vinet had any particular comments 
on the U.S. request, other than to note with relief that 
healthcare services had not been included. 
CELLUCCI