This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 002384 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, PMAT; OSD FOR ISA AND ISP; JCS 
FOR J5; EUCOM FOR J5, POLAD; CENTCOM FOR J5 AND POLAD; 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ PKK
SUBJECT: REFUTING THE TURKISH ALLEGATION OF SPE KHALILZAD 
MEETING WITH THE PKK/KADEK 
 
REF: A) STATE 93831 B) ANKARA 2330 C) ANKARA 2362 
 
 
(u) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons:  1.5 (B and D). 
 
 
¶1. (S) DCM called on MFA Director General for Bilateral 
Affairs Burcuoglu to refute strongly the Turkish allegations 
of a March 29 meeting between SPE Khalilzad and PKK/Kadek 
(ref a).  DCM also presented Burcuoglu with a diplomatic note 
containing language drawn from ref a.  DCM stressed that the 
information contained in TGS's letter was baseless and that 
the USG should not have to respond to such spurious 
allegations.  Burcuoglu replied he was unaware that TGS had 
sent such a letter and, having not seen its contents, could 
not comment at the present time.  He asked the DCM provide 
him a copy of TGS's letter (which we later did), and said he 
would respond to the Embassy's diplomatic note with a formal 
response. 
 
 
¶2. (S) Speaking in general terms, Burcuoglu said it was 
important for the GOT to relay reports of incidents of 
concern in northern Iraq, and asked the USG to continue to 
respond to such requests in order to keep the channels of 
communication open.  The DCM said it was one thing for the 
USG and the GOT to cooperate in order to verify the accuracy 
of reports of possible early-warning events in northern Iraq. 
 It was another thing for a senior TGS officer to make such 
baseless allegations against a senior USG official, and to 
make those allegations in writing through military channels. 
PEARSON