This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

271438Z Jul 03UNCLAS AMMAN 004644 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM JO
SUBJECT: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS: LOW TURNOUT PROMPTS 
GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND BALLOTING IN 9 MUNICIPALITIES 
 
REF: AMMAN 4629 
 
¶1. (U) Jordan's July 26 municipal elections suffered from low 
voter turnout causing the government to extend balloting in 9 
of the 82 municipalities in which elections were held.  In 17 
other municipalities, elections were not held because the 
number of candidates equaled the number of seats.  Final 
results should be released on Sunday, July 27, following the 
close of the second day of voting.  Jordan's Municipalities 
Law requires 51 percent of eligible voters' participation. 
Preliminary results in cities that did not have to vote 
indicates that at least 3 of the 46 women candidates won 
their seats in Kufranja (near Ajloun), Irbid, and Deir Alla 
(in the Jordan Valley). 
 
¶2. (U) In the Greater Amman Municipality, which is treated 
separately from other city councils, low turnout resulted in 
a second day of polling in 13 of the city's electoral 
districts.  PolCouns, who toured the city on election day, 
noted little campaign activity, few voters at polling 
stations, and empty campaign buses. 
 
¶3. (U) The Islamic Action Front, the political arm of the 
Muslim Brotherhood, fielded 11 candidates in the Amman 
municipal district, opting to boycott the remaining 
municipalities to protest a new government amendment to the 
elections law which authorizes the government to appoint a 
maximum of 50 percent municipal council members in addition 
to the mayors.  The government should announce on Tuesday, 
July 28, after the Cabinet session the names of the appointed 
council members and 99 mayors. 
HALE