This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/RSAT, EUR/UBI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/28/2013 
TAGS: MARR MASS PREL PARM PTER AF NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH RESPONSE TO OEF DEMARCHE 
 
REF: STATE 246182 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY POLITICAL COUNSELOR MARY DALY FOR REASONS 
1.5 (B AND D). 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request:  see para 3. 
 
¶2. (C)  Mission made reftel demarche to GONL prior to 
September 2-3 visit to Washington by Dutch PM Balkenende and 
FM de Hoop Scheffer.  Post was advised that GONL was not in a 
position to provide assets as requested reftel.  The Dutch 
plead budget constraints owing to their commitments to 
deployments in SFIR in Iraq and SFOR in Bosnia as well as 
their just concluded stint as co-lead nation of ISAF III in 
Afghanistan.  Nevertheless the Dutch are interested in 
exploring some sort of follow-on presence in Afghanistan and 
have been considering various options to include 
participation of Dutch special operations forces (SOF) 
personnel in a German-led "expanded ISAF" operation in Kunduz 
or possibly direct participation by Dutch SOF in Operation 
Enduring Freedom.  Concerning the latter possibility, post 
judges that there are competing views within the GONL -- the 
military is eager to get Dutch SOF involved in combat 
operations, while MFA and MOD are concerned about potential 
domestic political ramifications of Dutch SOF apprehending 
Taliban/Al Qaeda members that may in turn be detained in 
Guantanamo Bay. 
 
¶3. (C) Action request:  Post requests Washington advise 
whether there is interest in deployment of a small contingent 
of Dutch SOF personnel to Afghanistan, either in cooperation 
with the Germans in Kunduz or with OEF.  We judge a formal 
demarche to the GONL would help clarify GONL intentions in 
this regard. 
SOBEL