This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002682 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PA (CHAYDEN), EB, PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO SNAR EAID MOPS PGOV HO
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 13, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" on 
11/13 entitled "Missiles and helicopters".  "The visit of Colin 
Powell to Central America wasn't just for pleasure.  While he 
came to thank the countries supporting the U.S. in the coalition 
in Iraq, he also came to remind us that his country has a few 
million dollars, known as the Millennium Account, available to 
those developing democracies committed to foster political, 
economic and social reforms, as well as the fight against 
narcotrafficking and terrorism.  When he visited Nicaragua, 
Powell talked about one of the issues that concern him the most: 
the region's security situation." 
 
"The Americans have repeatedly warned the Nicaraguan government 
about the need to eliminate the ground-to-air missiles they have, 
which could fall in the wrong hands, such as the Colombian 
guerrillas or the terrorist groups operating in the region." 
 
"This must be a matter of concern to us all.  Some days ago, the 
international wires pointed out that these criminal groups are 
certainly interested in getting those missiles.  For that reason, 
the U.S. has insisted that Nicaragua must get rid of their 
missiles.  It's not odd that right after the visit of Colin 
Powell to that country, there has been a political struggle 
between President Bolanos, who is willing to comply with the U.S. 
demands, and the Sandinistas that hold control of Congress, who 
say that any decision on this matter must be taken by Congress." 
 
 
"Other sectors have said that Nicaragua can destroy its missiles 
in exchange of getting some helicopters, the same request 
Honduras has made to the U.S.  Unfortunately, they aren't willing 
to give away anything, and Powell was obviously clear on this 
issue, when he preferred to talk about the Millennium funds 
instead of making any commitment to give us the helicopters we 
need." 
 
"So, the Nicaraguans shouldn't expect anything either.  We won't 
give up our F-15s in exchange of the elimination of the dangerous 
missiles they have.  The Nicaraguans shouldn't expect to get 
helicopters in exchange of their SAM-7s, because if the Americans 
give them helicopters, we should also get our helicopters too." 
 
Palmer