This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 004231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/05/2013 
TAGS: MOPS PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: ARREST OF TURKISH SF CLOSES BORDER 
 
REF: ANKARA 4230 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
¶2. (S) Ambassador spoke with MFA Acting U/S Baki Ilkin the 
morning of July 5 concerning the arrest of Turkish Special 
Forces in Iraq (reftel).  Ilkin said that US military 
authorities in northern Iraq told the Turkish Liaison team 
with the 173rd in Iraq that an unidentified group of Turks 
had been arrested and that those held could be released if 
they were identified and if there were a request for release 
through diplomatic channels.  Ilkin reported that the 
American unit involved was observed Friday morning in Kirkuk 
training to storm buildings.  After a number of repetitions, 
they headed for Suleimaniya accompanied by PUK security with 
a convoy totaling some 40 vehicles.  They entered the 
building housing the Turkish SF behind two smoke bombs. 
 
 
¶3. (S) In contact with OCPA chief of staff, Ambassador was 
unable to confirm the offer allegedly made to the Turkish 
Liaison team to release the suspects if identified.  From 
Baghdad, we understand that the investigation of the alleged 
participation of one of the Turkish Special Forces in a plot 
to assassinate the mayor of Kirkuk is continuing. 
 
 
¶4. (S) We have indications from US military sources that an 
additional raid in which another 10 Turkish Special Forces 
were possibly taken into custody may have occurred the 
morning of July 5.  We also understand that the Turks have 
closed and secured the Habur gate with armed guards as a 
result of this incident.  BG Kilicarslan, Deputy Commander of 
the Turkish Special Forces is on his way to Suleimaniya with 
a delegation of 16 people in three cars to meet with PUK "PM" 
Barham Seleh and check on the situation. 
 
 
¶5. (U) The mainstream Turkish "Hurriyet" newspaper this 
morning contained a banner front page report of the incident 
noting the US allegations of an assassination plot.  PM 
Erdogan called the event "an extremely distressing incident" 
and "not acceptable."  DCHOD general Buyukanit said the story 
is regrettably true.  He categorized the allegation that 
Turks were plotting an assassination of the Governor of 
Kirkuk as nonsense.  One news report said Secretary Powell 
told Gul that whatever was necessary would be done.  Another 
claimed that as a result US officials have pressed for 
Turkey's military withdrawal from Iraq.  Journalists have 
begun pressing the Embassy for a reaction. 
 
 
¶6. (S) Comment:  Based on the conversations the evening of 
July 4 between FM Gul and the Secretary, CHOD Gen Ozkok and 
EUCOMCDR Gen Jones, the Turkish leadership believes that the 
American senior leadership is now working to resolve this 
incident expeditiously.  This expectation and the relative 
calm of a weekend provide a short period in which the 
incident could be brought to a conclusion.  However, if the 
incident is not resolved and the Turkish Special Forces are 
not released by Monday morning, there will be a rapidly 
accelerating political and public reaction in Turkey that 
would seriously damage to US Turkish relations with broad 
repercussions.  Embassy Ankara is ready for any action that 
can contribute to resolving the issue within the next 48 
hours. 
PEARSON