This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TURKISH GOVERNMENT RELEASES ANTI-TIP CIRCULAR 
FOCUSED ON IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
REF: STATE 171293 
 
 
¶1. In a significant step to further implementation of Turkish 
laws and policy combating trafficking in persons, the 
Interior Ministry (MOI) recently issued a circular to all 
governors and senior security officials -- including the 
Jandarma -- calling for tougher implementation of existing 
regulations.  In a conversation with us July 22, MOI 
Secretary General Nezih Dogan confirmed press reports that 
 
SIPDIS 
the new circular is part of the wider GOT Action Plan to 
combat TIP.  According to Dogan, the circular: 
 
 
-- increases the penalty against those who force foreigners 
into prostitution -- those convicted of trafficking in 
persons will face 5-10 years "heavy imprisonment;" 
 
 
-- grants temporary visa extensions and/or supplementary 
residency permits to victims of trafficking and instructs 
that they be treated as victims not criminals; 
 
 
-- instructs local officials to establish shelters for 
victims; 
 
 
-- instructs border control personnel to be more alert to the 
status of groups of young women entering Turkey. 
 
 
¶2. Dogan asserted to us that this circular "is much more 
detailed" than previous memoranda on trafficking.  The 
circular also includes an "Implementation Guide" designed to 
spell out exactly who is responsible for carrying out MOI's 
instructions on TIP.  The circular, Dogan explained, outlines 
a four-tier system of monitoring implementation: 1) governors 
and police chiefs; 2) MOI Inspectors; 3) Public Prosecutors; 
and 4) public opinion, which Dogan said is becoming more 
outspoken and therefore more influential on this issue. 
 
 
¶3. This circular was noted in a number of local newspapers, 
demonstrating the interest of the GOT in informing public 
opinion to motivate the public to assist in combating TIP. 
 
 
¶4. We will continue to follow up with MOI officials to 
underscore the importance of implementation of GOT anti-TIP 
initiatives. 
DEUTSCH