This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004239 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2013 
TAGS: IR KNNP MNUC PARM PREL
SUBJECT: GOT CONCURS WITH USG WAY AHEAD ON IAEA/IRAN, 
STRESSES THAT IRAN MUST COOPERATE UNCONDITIONALLY WITH IAEA 
 
 
REF: A. ODLUM-MEANS E-MAIL (6-30-03) 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 186962 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶2. (C) Per ref A, we delivered ref B demarche on July 2 to 
Ibrahim Yagli, Head of the Disarmament Department at the MFA. 
Yagli concurred with the way ahead outlined in our demarche, 
and stressed that the GOT position on this matter is that the 
GOI must cooperate unconditionally with the IAEA inspection 
process. However, he also said that, presuming Iran does 
begin to cooperate with the IAEA, the international community 
should display the appropriate degree of appreciation and 
encouragement. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Commenting on the June BOG meeting, Yagli said that he 
believes that the GOI was surprised by the unity displayed by 
the international community on this issue, understands the 
gravity of the international community's message, and that 
Iran now has no choice but to cooperate with the IAEA. Yagli 
was skeptical that the GOI would now employ the tactic of 
inviting national experts to visit Iranian nuclear 
facilities, asserting that it is clear that the international 
community (including the GOT) would never respect a report 
from "national inspectors." Polmiloff pointed out that not 
every member of the international community is as convinced 
as the USG and the GOT that the particularities of the 
Iranian nuclear program pose a threat to international 
security -- some are looking for any reason to excuse the 
GOI's actions. 
 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT: While the GOT shares USG concerns in full 
regarding the GOI's nuclear program, Yagli's comments 
possibly reflect a more sanguine attitude within the GOT 
regarding the intention of the GOI to cooperate fully with 
the IAEA in the aftermath of the June BOG meeting, as well as 
the steadfastness of the international community. Yagli has 
always displayed a great deal of appreciation for the 
information provided by Washington on the GOI's nuclear 
program. Any information which Washington can provide the GOT 
regarding the degree of the GOI's cooperation with the IAEA 
will be of great assistance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PEARSON