This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O.  12958:  DECL: 06-16-13 
TAGS: CE MV AGMT LTTE
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 90  (06-16-03) 
 
Classified by Ambassador E.Ashley Wills, Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
CONTENTS:  MFA REQUEST RE IRAQ 
-          AMBASSADOR MEETS PRESIDENT ONE LAST TIME 
 
MFA REQUEST RE IRAQ 
------------------- 
¶1.  (SBU) URGENT:  MFA Foreign Secretary Nihal Rodrigo 
sent us a fax today (June 16) confirming that Sri Lanka's 
ambassador to Iraq, M.M.A. Farouque, plans to return to 
Baghdad at some point this week.  (Note:  Farouque is now 
in Sri Lanka.  By the way, we have already passed the MFA 
the info re diplomats in Iraq contained in State 163526, 
dated June 14).  The MFA had two urgent requests: 
 
-- The MFA would like for Farouque to be able to touch 
base with the U.S. ambassador to Jordan at some point 
this week (re the Amman-Baghdad road, and associated 
logistics and other arrangements, etc.).  Please check 
with NEA and ask whether we can provide Ambassador 
Farouque an appropriately high-level contact (ambassador, 
DCM, etc.) at Embassy Amman that he can discuss such 
issues with.  Phone numbers would be helpful, too. 
 
-- The MFA wants to set up an appointment for Farouque 
with Ambassador Bremer in Baghdad as soon as feasible. 
Please advise us how to answer this request. 
 
We would appreciate anything that we can pass to the MFA 
as soon as possible, given that Farouque seems to be 
leaving shortly.  Thank you.  (POL) 
 
AMBASSADOR MEETS PRESIDENT ONE LAST TIME 
---------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (C) Before departing Sri Lanka early tomorrow (June 
17), Ambassador Wills met with President Kumaratunga one 
last time on June 13.  Kumaratunga asked about the peace 
process.  The Ambassador remarked that it was at a 
turning point, with much depending on how the Tigers 
reacted from here on out.  Kumaratunga then asked whether 
the USG would assist Sri Lanka if the Tigers re-commenced 
hostilities.  The Ambassador noted that that was a 
hypothetical.  It was almost certainly the case, however, 
that the international community would be deeply 
concerned and would carefully monitor the situation.  Re 
cohabitation, the president placed all the blame on the 
PM and the government.  The Ambassador demurred on that, 
noting that both sides had a role in the problems and had 
roles in clearing things up.  Kumaratunga backed up, 
claiming that she was at most "25 percent" in the wrong. 
(POL) 
 
WILLS