This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 005497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/28/2013 
TAGS: PREL EAID IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN TO WORK WITH, BUT NOT "RECOGNIZE," IRAQI 
GOVERNING COUNCIL 
 
REF: A. CAIRO 7212 
     ¶B. CAIRO 7254 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B)(D) 
 
------------------- 
SUMMARY AND COMMENT 
------------------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Speaking to a visiting delegation of Iraqi Governing 
Council members August 25, PM Abul Ragheb and FonMin Muasher 
pledged to work with the GC, but said formal recognition 
would be premature.  Both urged the GC to work to expand ties 
with Iraq's neighbors, and said they hoped the GC was the 
first step toward a sovereign Iraqi government.  They also 
emphasized the need for the GC to extend deeper roots in 
Iraqi society, and said its success or failure would be 
judged by progress in this regard.  FonMin Muasher's Office 
Director said GC members expressed some unhappiness with 
their reception in Egypt and at the Arab League.  The GOJ 
played up the GC's visit here publicly as the first step 
toward restoring normal Jordanian-Iraqi relations, almost 
certainly with an eye to reestablishing the preferential 
trade and oil relations Jordan enjoyed with the previous 
regime -- while making clear that formal recognition was 
premature, a gesture to domestic sentiment of uneasiness 
toward the coalition forces present in Iraq.  END SUMMARY AND 
COMMENT. 
 
-------------------------------- 
COOPERATION, BUT NOT RECOGNITION 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Four members of the Iraqi Governing Council (GC), 
led by the GC's rotating leader, Ibrahim Jafari, and 
including GC members Adnan Pachachi, Ghazi al-Yawar, and 
Barak Abu Sultan, visited Amman August 25 and met with Prime 
Minister Ali Abul Ragheb and Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher. 
 The meeting received prominent press coverage August 26, 
with photos and page 1 above the fold coverage in all major 
dailies. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Following the meeting, FonMin Muasher told the press 
that the GOJ had "declared Jordan's readiness to cooperate 
positively with all the political forces in Iraq and with the 
Council.  We are not speaking of recognition as this would be 
premature now.  We are speaking of dealing with the Council 
in a positive manner."  Muasher commented that Jordan would 
"provide the Iraqi people with every possible assistance." 
Muasher said he hoped the GC would succeed and "lead to an 
Iraqi government which represents the Iraqi people." 
 
---------------------------------- 
JORDAN TO HELP GC WITH ARAB LEAGUE 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  Muasher told the press that the GC delegation had 
asked for Jordan's assistance in securing representation at 
the upcoming September 9-10 meeting of Arab League foreign 
ministers.  Muasher said that Jordan would make contacts "so 
that Iraq will be represented at the September meeting of the 
Arab League." 
 
¶5.  (U)  PM Abul Ragheb told the press that he had pledged to 
continue "the strong Jordan-Iraq political, economic, and 
humanitarian cooperation."  He said he had urged the GC 
members to speed adoption of "laws and legislation within the 
framework of a constitution that regulates Iraq's relations 
with neighbors, especially in the economic and trade fields." 
 He also encouraged the GC to assume responsibility for 
running the day-to-day affairs of Iraq "so that they win the 
support of the Iraqi people." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
IN PRIVATE, GC RAISES ASSETS, INFILTRATIONS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S)  PM Abul Ragheb told the Charge and EconCouns August 
28 that the GC visit had been very positive.  Abul Ragheb 
said he told the group that he looked forward to the day when 
Jordan could recognize them as Iraq's legitimate government, 
and, in that regard, he recommended that the GC try to be 
more active in developing links to the Iraqi people.  Abul 
Ragheb reported that the GC members had asked about frozen 
Iraqi assets in Jordan (septel), and had raised general 
concerns over infiltrations across the Jordanian border. 
Abul Ragheb said he pledged full Jordanian cooperation in 
dealing with any border issues.  He concluded by saying that 
the GC members had described Amman as "the best stop" on 
their recent Arab itinerary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
GC LESS THAN HAPPY WITH RECEPTION IN EGYPT 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (C)  In a conversation with House Appropriations 
Committee staffers Scott Lilly and David Morrison August 27, 
FonMin Muasher's Private Office Director, Ali al-Ayed, said 
that the visiting GC members had expressed unhappiness with 
their reception in Egypt and by the Arab League (contrary to 
refs).  According to Ayed, the GC members complained that the 
Egyptians "would not even describe the group as a delegation 
from the GC," but instead insisted publicly and privately 
that they were receiving the GC members as "individuals." 
Ayed also told the StaffDel that Jordan was not particularly 
happy with the inclusion of INC leader Ahmed Chalabi in the 
GC, but this fact would not change the GOJ's decision to deal 
with the GC.  Ayed emphasized that Jordan would do all it 
could to deal with the GC and facilitate its work.  The key 
to success in Iraq, Ayed said, is involving Iraqis in 
governing Iraq.  The GC is therefore a good step in the right 
direction. 
HALE