This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000584 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ YM DEMARCHE
SUBJECT: CLOSURE OF IRAQI MISSIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 72921 
     ¶B. STATE 75557 
 
Classified By: Edmund J. Hull, Ambassador for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  DCM delivered reftel demarches to Chief of the 
Americas Office Abdul-Salam Q. Al-Awadi on 3/24.  Awadi said 
he would convey the U.S. message to FM Qirbi, but offered his 
own "opinion" of the ROYG position.  He said that it would be 
very difficult for Yemen to act against Iraq because of their 
long-standing bilateral relations.  He further noted that for 
countries like Jordan and Egypt this type of action would be 
easier because they are closer to the U.S.  Awadi also 
indicated that the ROYG was concerned about Yemeni students 
still present in Iraq, noting that severance of diplomatic 
contacts could restrict the ROYG's ability to assist them. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  DCM explained that our request pertained only to 
the Iraqi government, its officials and its missions, and 
that Yemen-Iraq people-to-people relations would obviously 
continue.  Moreover, the impending removal of the Iraqi 
regime would compel the ROYG to address the question of how 
to deal with representatives from Saddam's government.  Still 
hesitant, Awadi stated that it would be very difficult to 
change the ROYG position, especially in light of Yemeni 
support for the Iraqi people. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Also in attendance were DATT and 
Pol/EconOff(notetaker). 
 
HULL