This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O.  12958:  DECL: 04-03-13 
TAGS: CE MV AGMT LTTE
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 52  (04-03-03) 
Classified by Ambassador Wills, Reasons 1.5 (b, d) 
 
CONTENTS:  SRI LANKAN TEA REQUEST - URGENT 
-          LOCAL IRAQ REACTION 
-          SLMM RAISES NOTION OF A "THIRD FORCE" 
-          PRESIDENT THREATENS TAKEOVER OF MINISTRIES 
-          SECURITY ZONE ISSUE IN THE NEWS 
 
SRI LANKAN TEA REQUEST - URGENT 
------------------------------- 
¶1. (U) Colombo 561 described GSL's request that the US 
buy Sri Lankan tea for humanitarian aid to Iraq.  The 
Ambassador needs to have an answer to this action request 
by Friday Sri Lanka time so he can get back to the 
requesting Ministry.  We understand this isn't much time 
to get Washington to act on a request, but we really do 
need you to press the relevant offices for an answer 
before COB Thursday Washington time, so the Ambassador 
will be able to give GSL an answer on Friday our time. 
(ECON) 
 
LOCAL IRAQ REACTION 
------------------- 
¶2.  (C) Local reaction re Iraq remains muted.  We have 
not heard of any anti-war demonstrations planned for 
Colombo or its immediate environs.  We imagine that there 
will be something after Muslim prayers this Friday.  Some 
sort of demonstration is being planned for Kandy.  We 
also heard a report, which we seek to confirm, that there 
might be an anti-war rally in Jaffna this week.  Pls see 
our latest cable re press coverage, which continues to be 
heavy. 
 
¶3.  (C) By the way, per a class e-mail note from the SA 
Front Office sent to South Asia posts, we just want to 
note that we have not (repeat not) had any indication 
(nor heard any reports) that Sri Lankans might be leaving 
for Iraq to fight for the remnants of the Saddamite 
regime.  (POL/RSO) 
 
SLMM RAISES NOTION OF A "THIRD FORCE" 
------------------------------------- 
¶4.  (C) FYI.  Recent statements by the Sri Lanka 
Monitoring Mission (SLMM), bizarrely, are hinting that 
some sort of non-LTTE, non-GSL "third force" may have 
been involved in instigating the recent sea 
confrontations off the northeast coast.  In its press 
release re the March 20 sinking of a Chinese fishing 
trawler and re the March 31 attack on a SLN troop ship 
(see Reftels), the SLMM stated that it "cannot rule out 
the possibility that armed elements - not recognized by 
the parties" were involved.  No one here in Sri Lanka 
knows what the SLMM may be referring to, as no one knows 
of any potential "armed elements" outside of the 
government and the LTTE.  Based on our discussions with 
the SLMM, we think the group, in wimpy, overly diplomatic 
fashion, does not want to blame the LTTE directly, so 
they are putting up this straw man of other "armed 
elements."  Everyone else here is calling a spade a 
spade.  One Icelandic member of the SLMM mumbled darkly 
that perhaps the Indians might have been involved (we 
doubt that) or that an element of the Sea Tigers not 
under the control of the LTTE might have carried it out. 
(POL/DAO) 
 
PRESIDENT THREATENS TAKEOVER OF MINISTRIES 
------------------------------------------ 
¶5.  (C) FYI.  President Kumaratunga has recently stated 
that she might take over some of the government's 
ministries.  Her particular animus is focused on the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Information. 
In attacking these ministries, Kumaratunga is accusing 
the director of the international airport of being 
connected to the LTTE (he has a bad reputation, but we're 
unsure of this charge) and the Information Ministry of 
being anti-PA.  We are not sure how serious CBK is about 
these threats, but, based on what we are hearing, the 
mere mention is sparking additional cohabitation 
stresses.  By the way, if CBK took the plunge, we are not 
sure of the exact mechanics of such a move, though we are 
sure it would wind up in the courts.  (POL) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) By the way, the Ambassador is slated to meet 
President Kumaratunga tomorrow (April 4) at 10:30 A.M. 
 
SECURITY ZONE ISSUE IN THE NEWS 
------------------------------- 
¶7.  (U) FYI.  In response to continued criticism re the 
Jaffna security zone issue, the military has said it is 
willing to move some of its troops from hotels and other 
buildings in Jaffna city.  In making this proposal, the 
military has proposed moving into the Jaffna municipal 
council area and other buildings near that site.  While 
somewhat happy that the military is even discussing the 
matter, Tamils are urging the GSL to do more and think 
about getting the troops out of Jaffna city altogether. 
LTTE supporters, as you would guess, remain quite 
vociferous on this issue.  The positive news on all this 
is that folks are discussing these issues.  We expect 
that retired Indian General Nambiar's report on the 
issue, when it is out and in the press (which it is not 
as of yet), will stimulate further discussion.  (POL) 
 
WILLS