This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000717 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FOR FAS/EAMED 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR BERNSTEIN, SILLS AND PORTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD USTR
SUBJECT: EC REG 1774/2002: CANADA SEEKS DELAY IN 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
REF: STATE 57391 
 
¶1. Canada is concerned about the difficulty of implementing 
EC Regulation 1774/2002 on May 1 and, following receipt of 
Reftel demarche, sent a letter to the EC requesting a delay 
in implementation of the regulation concerning animal 
by-products.  According to the Department of Foreign Affairs 
and International Trade (DFAIT) Trade Policy Officer Sudha 
Kshatriya, Canada's Deputy Head of Mission in Brussels 
Laurette Glasgow sent the letter to the EC's Director General 
for Trade Peter Carl on Thursday, March 13.  Kshatriya said 
that she has been in direct contact with USTR's Jason 
Bernstein and has provided him with a copy of the letter. 
 
¶2. In Fall 2002 Canada raised their concerns about the 
Regulation bilaterally with the European Commission, during 
the November SPS committee meeting, and in a letter from 
Canadian Agriculture Minister Lyle Vanclief to EC Consumer 
Health and Safety Commissioner Byrne.  Kshatriya stated that 
the GOC has come to realize that the representations were not 
successful and that implementation of 1774/2002 was "a done 
deal."  Canada is now focusing on developing an industry 
implementation plan and has been in contact with the EC to 
seek clarification on the complex regulations.  Kshatriya 
noted that the GOC has been working with the US Animal and 
Plant Health Inspection Service on technical issues related 
to the implementation of the regulations.  Canada has not 
received any derogations from the EC. 
 
¶3. DFAIT is coordinating an interagency response to Reftel 
demarche, which we will pass along.  Reftel talking points 
were also delivered to Richard Fadden and Paul Haddow from 
the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. 
CELLUCCI