This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR PM/RSAT (ANNE BONFANTE), L/T, EUR/SE 
OSD FOR ISP/EUROPEAN POLICY (MARIA COPSON-NIECKO) 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR TU MASS
SUBJECT: GOT APPROVES REVISED SEEBRIG ASSURANCES 
 
 
REF: SECSTATE 201017 
 
 
¶1. Embassy Ankara received a diplomatic note from the Turkish 
MFA on June 24, confirming that the SEEBRIG assurances 
requested of the GOT (reftel) are acceptable to the GOT and 
that its note constitutes an agreement between the USG and 
the GOT. Embassy Ankara has reviewed the diplomatic note and 
can confirm that the text to which the GOT has agreed is 
identical to that which the Embassy provided to the GOT. The 
complete text of the diplomatic note follows at paragraph 2. 
A copy of the GOT's diplomatic note has also been faxed to 
PM/RSAT, L/T, and EUR/SE. 
 
 
¶2. Begin text of diplomatic note: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents it compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and refers to the Embassy's note 1138 of October 
16, 2002, which reads as follows: 
 
 
     "The Embassy of the United States of America presents 
its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Government of Turkey and refers its note verbale 866 of 
August 9, 2002 and to the provision of United States law that 
requires the Government of the United States of America, 
prior to a grant under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as 
amended, or successor legislation, or sale or lease under 
Section 3 of the Arms Export Control Act, as amended, or 
successor legislation, of defense articles, related training 
and other defense services, to obtain assurances from 
recipient nations of such defense articles, related training 
and other defense services. The Government of the United 
States of America is currently and may in the future be 
providing assistance to the Government of Bulgaria, as the 
Headquarters Host Nation of the South Eastern European 
Brigade (SEEBRIG), as well as to future SEEBRIG Headquarters 
Host Nations, for the establishment of a Communications 
Information System (CIS), for use by all SEEBRIG member 
states in furtherance of SEEBRIG operations.  Prior to 
permitting the temporary transfer and use of any such defense 
articles, related training and other defense services from 
the Government of Bulgaria or any other SEEBRIG member nation 
acting as the SEEBRIG Headquarters Host Nation, to the 
Government of Turkey for use in SEEBRIG operations the 
Government of the United States of America is required to 
obtain from the Government of Turkey the revised assurances 
below: 
 
 
¶A.  That unless the consent of the Government of the United 
States of America has been first obtained, the Government of 
Turkey shall not: 
     I)  Use or permit the use of such defense articles, 
related training or other defense services for purposes other 
than for SEEBRIG operations; 
     II)  Permit any use of such defense articles, related 
training or other defense services by anyone not an officer, 
employee or agent of the Government of Turkey; 
     III) Transfer or permit any officer, employee or agent 
of the Government of Turkey to transfer such defense 
articles, related training or other defense services by gift, 
sale, or otherwise, except to the SEEBRIG Headquarters Host 
Nation. 
 
 
¶B.  That when acting as the SEEBRIG Headquarters Host Nation, 
the Government of Turkey acknowledges its responsibility for 
security, control, inventory, service and maintenance of the 
defense articles, related training and other defense services 
provided to SEEBRIG by the United States Government.  In 
furtherance of its custodial role, it will be responsible for 
and will ensure the proper administration and temporary 
distribution of subject defense articles, related training 
and other defense services to SEEBRIG member states for use 
in SEEBRIG operations. 
 
 
¶C.  When acting as the SEEBRIG Headquarters Host Nation, the 
Government of Turkey provides its assurances that: 
     I)  it shall not transfer or permit any officer, 
employee, or agent of the Government of Turkey to transfer 
such defense articles, related training or other defense 
services to anyone not an officer, employee or agent of the 
government of a SEEBRIG member state; 
     II)  it will not permit the use of such defense 
articles, related training, or other defense services by 
anyone not an officer, employee or agent of the government of 
a SEEBRIG member state; 
     III)  it shall not use or permit the use of such defense 
articles, related training or other defense services for 
purposes other than SEEBRIG operations; 
     IV)  it shall return to the Government of the United 
States of America said defense articles, related training or 
other defense services provided with Peace Keeping Operations 
funds from the Government of the United States of America 
when they are no longer needed for the purposes for which 
they were furnished, unless the Government of the United 
States of America provides written consent to another 
disposition; and 
     V)  finally, it shall  not permanently transfer said 
defense articles, related training and other defense services 
or the responsibility thereof to the successor SEEBRIG 
Headquarters Host Nation prior to making formal written 
application for, and receipt of, the written consent of the 
Government of the United States of America. 
¶D.    The Government of Turkey shall at all times maintain 
the security of such defense articles, related training, and 
other defense services; that it shall provide substantially 
the same protection afforded to such articles or related 
training other defense services by the Government of the 
United States of America and; that it shall, as the United 
States may require, permit continuous observation and review 
by, and furnish necessary information to, representatives of 
the Government of the United States of America with regard to 
the use thereof by the Government of Turkey. 
 
 
¶E.  The subject defense articles, defense services and 
related training are being provided by the United States of 
America with the understanding that they will not be 
transferred to Cyprus or otherwise used to further the 
severance of division of Cyprus. 
 
 
     The Ministry's reply stating that the foregoing is 
acceptable to the Government of the Republic of Turkey shall, 
together with this note, constitute an agreement between the 
two governments, which shall enter into force on the date of 
the Ministry's reply." 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey has 
the honor to confirm that the proposal set forth in the 
Embassy's note is acceptable to the Government of the 
Republic of Turkey and that the Embassy's note and this note 
in reply shall constitute an agreement between the two 
governments which shall enter into force on this date. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
PEARSON