This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031617Z Sep 03UNCLAS AMMAN 005600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
CPA FOR CIC MAREK BELKA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EFIN IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN PARTICIPATION IN MADRID IRAQ DONORS 
CONFERENCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 235394 
 
This is an action request.  See Para 3. 
 
¶1.  (sbu)  Summary.  Confirming that Jordan is committed to 
providing technical and cooperative assistance to Iraqi 
ministries, Planning Minister Awadallah asked us for U.S. 
help in securing an invitation for Jordan to the October 
23-24 donors' conference in Madrid.  In addition, Jordan has 
four individuals under consideration as Jordanian 
representatives to the Council for International Coordination 
(CIC).  Awadallah is coordinating Jordan's response to 
numerous requests from Iraqi ministries and institutions for 
assistance from Jordanian counterparts. 
 
------------------------ 
CIC Rep to be Named Soon 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (sbu)   Planning Miniser Bassem Awadallah, who has taken 
responsibility for coordinating Jordanian technical 
assistance to Iraqi ministries, confirmed to Charge September 
1 that the Prime Minister had four names under consideration 
as Jordanian representatives to the CIC.  He said all four 
were "go-getters" from the private sector who would work hard 
to move forward initiatives with various Iraqi and Jordanian 
ministries (see below).  They would also provide value-added 
to the CIC team in Baghdad.  Awadallah said a staff member 
from the Jordanian Embassy in Baghdad would continue to 
represent Jordan at CIC meetings until Prime Minister Abul 
Ragheb has made a choice among the four. 
 
------------------------------- 
Invitation to Madrid Conference 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (sbu)   Awadallah asked for U.S. assistance in obtaining 
an invitation to attend the October 24 Madrid Conference on 
donor assistance to Iraq.  He said that it had only been last 
minute U.S. intervention with UNDP that secured Jordan's 
invitation to the preliminary conference in June.  He thought 
this help would be required again. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Iraqi Requests for Jordanian Assistance 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (sbu)  At Madrid, Awadallah thought Jordan would be in a 
position to describe ongoing and planned assistance to Iraqi 
institutions in several areas in which formal or informal 
assistance requests had been provided.  These include 
requests for training for central bank and bank employees at 
Jordanian training centers and ministry-to-ministry technical 
assistance to the Ministries of Health, Trade, 
Transportation, Labor, Agriculture, and Justice.  Contacts 
between Jordanian and Iraqi ministries are being facilitated 
by the Embassy (including the Military Assistance Program's 
Humanitarian Assistance Coordinating Center).  CPA and Iraqi 
officials visiting or passing through Jordan are also 
pursuing cooperative activities with Jordanian officials. 
Post will email to CPA (Marek Belka and Ali Tulba) and to 
NEA/ARN a tracking sheet and description of the various 
initiatives. 
HALE