This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 OTTAWA 002125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENRG TRGY CA
SUBJECT: CANADA: HIGH ON HYDROGEN 
 
REF: REF: (A) STATE 146268 (B) OTTAWA 01721 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  This cable provides an overview of Canada's 
public and private efforts to develop technologies for the 
use of hydrogen as a fuel.  Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) 
is drafting a detailed national plan for directing Canadian 
hydrogen efforts ("Canadian Hydrogen Roadmap"), but it is at 
least one year away from completion, according to GOC 
officials.  On April 15, Industry Canada released its 
"Canadian Fuel Cell Commercialisation Roadmap," a document 
that will complement the expected "Hydrogen Roadmap." 
Research teams at the National Research Council (NRC) labs in 
Ottawa and Vancouver are working on the next generation of 
PEM (proton-exchange membrane) and solid oxide fuel cell 
(SOFC) components to find ways to lower the cost, reduce the 
size, and improve the efficiency of fuel cells.  High-profile 
Canadian corporations, some of them world leaders in their 
field, are also doing their part to spur the development of 
hydrogen-related technology and infrastructure in Canada (see 
paras 10-11).  Given its expertise in some hydrogen 
technologies, Canada could contribute significantly to the 
development of the hydrogen economy in North America, and we 
recommend continued close collaboration between governments 
and the private sectors of the US and Canada.  END SUMMARY. 
 
GOC:  BRING ON THE HYDROGEN ECONOMY 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Canadian Government (GOC) has made a multi-agency 
commitment to developing the hydrogen economy.  Natural 
Resources Canada's (NRCan's) hydrogen-related research and 
development (H2 R&D) is handled by the CANMET Energy 
Technology Centre (CETC).  Vesna Scepanovic, Hydrogen and 
Fuel Cell Program Manager of the CETC, highlighted for Emboff 
the GOC's strong interest in supporting private H2 R&D, as 
well as performing some of its own.  She emphasized NRCan's 
leading role in 20 years of H2 R&D for a total expenditure of 
C$183 million (US$133 million), not including the new 
Canadian Transportation Fuel Cell Alliance (see para 3).  She 
pointed out that more recently involved GOC agencies include 
Transport Canada, the National Research Council (NRC), and 
Environment Canada.  Scepanovic said that Industry Canada and 
the Department of National Defence (DND) are becoming more 
interested in the use of hydrogen, as shown by Industry 
Canada's release of the Fuel Cell Commercialisation Roadmap 
in April (see paras 7-9).  Scepanovic mentioned that NRCan is 
currently working on a Canadian Hydrogen Roadmap that will 
take at least one year to develop.  She commented that it 
should have predated the Fuel Cell Roadmap because the new 
Hydrogen Roadmap will be a more comprehensive plan, 
including, but not limited to, fuel cell technology. 
 
¶3.  In 2000, under the Canadian Climate Change Action Plan, 
CETC created the Canadian Transportation Fuel Cell Alliance 
(CTFCA).  The CTFCA is an organization that brings together 
more than 60 universities, private companies, and government 
agencies.  Richard Fry, CTFCA's Fuel Cell Infrastructure 
Program Manager, told Emboff that his program will receive 
C$23 million (US$17 million) over five years (ending in 2005) 
through NRCan to fund projects on hydrogen fueling stations 
and demonstrations of hydrogen production from methanol, 
natural gas, electrolysis, and recovery of waste hydrogen. 
Fry acknowledged some GOC interest in hydrogen production 
from nuclear power sources and observed that Geoffrey 
Ballard, founder of Canadian fuel cell producer Ballard 
Power, publicly supports the idea.  However, Fry and other 
officials indicate a preference for renewable sources of 
hydrogen production, although current government funding of 
wind and solar projects is weak.  For now Canada continues to 
produce the majority of its hydrogen from fossil fuels. 
Major CTFCA partners include Ballard Power Systems, Ford 
Motor Company, Hydrogenics Corporation, QuestAir 
Technologies, and Stuart Energy Systems (for more details on 
these Canadian companies see para 10). 
 
¶4.  The National Research Council of Canada (NRC) does 
significant research related to PEM (proton-exchange 
membrane) fuel cells and SOFCs (solid-oxide fuel cells). 
Senior researchers in Ottawa are applying their expertise and 
lab capacity in materials science towards specific fuel cell 
applications, while a more focused fuel cell program is 
growing at NRC's Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation in 
Vancouver.  One project involves reducing the amount of 
platinum needed in fuel cell catalysts, which could 
drastically lower their cost.  NRC officials emphasize that 
they are a "crown corporation" distinct from the GOC (which 
in any case provides most of their funding).  NRCan and its 
CANMET labs form the epicenter of GOC hydrogen research and 
policy. 
 
KYOTO RATIFICATION PROVIDES IMPETUS 
----------------------------------- 
¶5.  The GOC ratified the Kyoto protocol in late 2002 and 
views hydrogen as a potential tool for important reductions 
in greenhouse gas emissions.  Technology Early Action 
Measures (TEAM), a division of the Climate Change Action Fund 
(CCAF), provides investment for technology that promises to 
reduce emissions while sustaining social and economic 
development.  TEAM, which encourages clean energy solutions 
that can be marketed quickly, was initially budgeted C$60 
million (US$44 million) from its inception in 1998 to 2001. 
An additional C$35 million (US$25 million) will see it 
through to 2004.  In one example of hydrogen technology 
investment, TEAM provided C$1.1 million (US$822,000) for an 
Ontario Power Technologies project in 2000 to build a 
prototype heat and power plant to run on fuel cells. 
 
¶6.  Hydrogen has also attracted attention and funding from 
Technology Partnerships Canada (TPC), a loan program that 
supports private sector R&D.  For example, TPC invested 
C$4.34 million (US$3.24 million) in Stuart Energy Systems in 
1999 for the design of a cost-effective refueling system for 
hydrogen-powered buses. 
 
"CANADIAN FUEL CELL COMMERCIALISATION ROADMAP" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7.  Industry Minister Allan Rock released the "Canadian Fuel 
Cell Commercialisation Roadmap" on April 15 of this year 
(information available at www.strategis.ic.gc.ca).  In it, 
the GOC identifies the economic and environmental goals of H2 
fuel cell development, such as cleaner air and lower 
climate-changing emissions levels (towards Kyoto 
requirements).  It views hydrogen as an important energy 
resource for transportation, heating, and power generation. 
The GOC believes it holds a world leadership position in this 
sector and endorses the roadmap as a way to maintain a 
Canadian edge in a global hydrogen economy.  The Roadmap 
profiles no fewer than 96 Canadian players, 42 of which are 
GOC agencies (Environment Canada, TPC, NRCan's TEAM, Industry 
Canada, Transport Canada) or NGOs (CHA, Fuel Cells Canada). 
The other 54 profiles are broken into three categories:  Fuel 
Cell Producers (Hydrogenics, Ballard Power), Parts and 
Systems Suppliers (QuestAir, Vandenborre), and Fueling 
Infrastructure (Stuart Energy).  (For details on these 
participants see para 10). 
 
¶8.  Most economic data in the Roadmap is from 2001.  The GOC 
estimates 1,800 Canadian jobs are directly connected and 
dedicated to the fuel cell industry, 76% of which are located 
in Western Canada (concentrated in British Columbia).  This 
number is thought to have remained stable over the last two 
years and represents mostly university and community college 
graduates.  According to the GOC, 2001 fuel cell industry 
revenues were estimated at C$96.9 million (US$70.1 million), 
with 70% coming from Western Canada.  The GOC predicts 70% 
revenue growth between 2001 and 2003, resulting in an 
estimated C$165.2 million (US$119.5 million) in Canadian fuel 
cell industry revenue this year.  For purposes of comparison, 
the US fuel cell market is estimated to be worth about US$1.4 
billion this year (according to a report from the Business 
Communications Company, Inc., website www.bccresearch.com). 
Using those numbers, the Canadian fuel cell market is roughly 
5% the value of the US fuel cell market, which may seem 
insignificant until one realizes that 2002 nominal Canadian 
GDP was about 7% of US GDP.  Thus one can see that the fuel 
cell market is playing an equally important role in the 
Canadian economy proportionate to the US fuel cell market and 
economy. 
 
ROADMAP TO GREATER EFFICIENCY 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The "Roadmap" recommends strategies to stimulate early 
market demand by showcasing technology and educating the 
public.  To improve product quality while reducing cost, the 
Roadmap promotes information sharing and the adoption of 
common performance and technical standards between 
researchers and developers, the private sector, and academic 
institutions.  To help in the financing of H2 fuel cell R&D, 
the Roadmap proposes tax incentives and matching funds for 
related investments.  The GOC intends to "take a lead role in 
setting codes and standards for fuel, fuel cells, and fueling 
systems."  The Roadmap concludes with the goal of "developing 
a national fuel cell strategy within the next year" and 
incorporating Roadmap working groups into Fuel Cells Canada, 
an industry association that actually began as part of 
Industry Canada (see para 14). 
 
SAMPLING OF CANADIAN COMPANIES RECEIVING GOC FUNDS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10.  The bulk of Canadian private sector H2 R&D efforts (87% 
of all Canadian fuel cell R&D) is clustered around Vancouver, 
British Columbia (B.C.), only 150 miles north of Seattle. 
Another center of private hydrogen activity is in the Toronto 
area.  Following is a summary of some major private sector 
players with their location, their focus, and their GOC 
funding: 
 
COMPANY:  Ballard Power Systems 
   LOCATION:  Burnaby, B.C. (Vancouver area) 
   FOCUS/PRODUCT:  World leader of PEM (proton exchange 
                   membrane) fuel cell manufacturing. 
   GOC FUNDING:  CETC funds in early 90s for fuel cells in 
                 city buses; C$8m (US$5.8m) from NRCan, 
                 Industry Canada, Environment Canada,and 
                 Transport Canada for fuel cells in Ford 
                 cars. 
 
COMPANY:  QuestAir Technologies 
   LOCATION:  Burnaby, B.C. (Vancouver area) 
   FOCUS/PRODUCT:  Hydrogen and methane harvesting through 
                   gas purification and separation. 
   GOC FUNDING:  C$9.6m (US$7m) from TPC for H2 
                 purification technology R&D.  Government 
                 of British Columbia has also funded 
                 QuestAir R&D. 
 
COMPANY:  Stuart Energy, owns Vandenborre Hydrogen 
          Technologies (formerly Belgian) 
   LOCATION:  Mississauga, Ontario (Toronto area) 
   FOCUS/PRODUCT:  Hydrogen refueling and power back-up 
                   systems.  Active in European and Asian 
                   markets. 
   GOC FUNDING:  C$5.8m (US$4.2m) from TPC and CCAF for 
                 cost-effective and reliable method of 
                 refueling hydrogen fuel cell buses. 
 
COMPANY:  Hydrogenics Corporation 
   LOCATION:  Mississauga, Ontario (Toronto area) 
   FOCUS/PRODUCT:  Constructs power generation systems 
                   based on PEM fuel cells.  Named Canada's 
                   fastest growing company during last 5 
                   years by PROFIT magazine. 
   GOC FUNDING:  C$500,000 (US$364,000) from NRCan for 
                 10-kilowatt fuel cell power module for use 
                 in forklifts, utility and mining vehicles. 
 
 
 
SOME CANADIAN COMPANIES ARE WORLD LEADERS IN THEIR FIELD 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶11.  The above list details only four of a large group of 
Canadian companies making significant steps forward in the 
development of hydrogen technology.  The following Canadian 
firms are considered to be among the world's leaders in their 
fields: 
 
Ballard Power 
     PEM (proton-exchange membrane) technology 
 
Dynetek 
     Compressed hydrogen storage 
 
Greenlight Division of Hydrogenics 
     Fuel cell systems testing 
 
HERA Hydrogen Storage Systems 
     Hydrogen storage in light-weight hydride materials 
     and R&D on carbon-based materials for H2 storage. 
 
 
HYDROGEN ECONOMY OFF TO A GOOD START 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶12.  The Canadian private sector foresees strong consumer 
demand for hydrogen-powered products in the near future and 
many products are already on the market.  Stuart Energy has 
mobile and permanent hydrogen refueling stations running; 
Hydrogenics offers portable and stationary hydrogen-run power 
generators; Ballard fuel cells are in both Coleman Powermate 
generators and Daimler/Chrysler buses and cars.  According to 
Stuart Energy, modifying a current internal combustion engine 
to run on hydrogen (cutting emissions dramatically) costs 
only about US$700, meaning that large numbers of Canadians 
(and Americans) could be driving hydrogen-powered vehicles 
today.  Companies such as Stuart Energy that are not 
primarily involved with fuel cell technology (whose practical 
applications are still 15-20 years away) see the 'hydrogen 
economy' as a more immediate subset of the larger economy. 
Instead of replacing contemporary energy sources, hydrogen 
can complement them and help optimize their use through its 
ability to store energy during off-peak hours for emergency 
use during times of heavy demand. 
 
BUSINESS ACROSS THE BORDER 
-------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Private sector players in the US and Canada are showing 
a healthy degree of teamwork with regard to hydrogen 
technology and applications.  Companies on both sides of the 
border belong to the same H2 industry organizations (Ballard 
Power, for example, is a member of the Canadian Fuel Cell 
Partnership, and Ford Motor Company is a partner of the 
Canadian Transportation Fuel Cell Alliance).  Some companies 
are conducting joint projects; for instance, US General 
Motors is working with Canadian firms Hydrogenics and General 
Hydrogen, and Ford is working with Stuart Energy and Ballard 
Power.  Canadian and American businesses would both benefit 
from a compatible, balanced and strong hydrogen 
infrastructure on both sides of the border, so they have an 
incentive to cooperate in working towards that goal.  GOC 
officials confirmed that any multinational with an office 
based in Canada qualifies for hydrogen-related government 
funds, which might make American private investment in 
hydrogen projects in Canada even more attractive. 
 
H2 INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS IN CANADA 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  A host of organizations have sprung up in efforts to 
coordinate the hydrogen-related activities of industries, 
universities, research institutions, the GOC and provincial 
governments.  Two examples are Fuel Cells Canada (based in 
the NRC's Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation in Vancouver) 
and the Canadian Hydrogen Association (CHA, offices in 
Toronto and Montreal).  Fuel Cells Canada, a non-profit 
industry association that began with support from the 
National Research Council (NRC), provides support and 
services for continuing demonstration, development, and 
deployment of hydrogen fuel cell technology.  The CHA, also 
non-profit, sponsors and organizes meetings and conferences 
for its members and promotes educational activities in 
schools.  CHA members include Ballard Power, Dynetek, General 
Hydrogen, Hydrogenics, and Stuart Energy.  These two 
associations form the industry framework for plans like the 
Fuel Cell Commercialisation Roadmap that call for a wide 
variety of players dealing in different sectors of the 
hydrogen economy. 
 
US-CANADIAN COORDINATION: KEEPING THE LIGHT ON 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶15.  Although NRCan already collaborates with DOE on hydrogen 
safety standards and educational outreach projects, their 
hydrogen managers at the working level are eager for further 
bilateral coordination.  Fortunately NRCan officials say that 
they do not feel they are duplicating US H2 R&D efforts. 
While both countries' scientists are researching many of the 
same issues, they are "developing very specific 
technologies."  In the recent bilateral energy consultations 
held in Ottawa, the GOC committed to participation in the 
International Partnership for the Hydrogen Economy (IPHE, REF 
A), despite concerns of potential overlapping with the 
International Energy Agency's (IEA's) Hydrogen Control Group 
(HCG) (REF B). 
 
¶16.  COMMENT:  While the GOC has a long track record of fuel 
cell funding and research, its attention to the significant 
matters of hydrogen production, storage, and transport is 
relatively new.  These areas would benefit greatly from 
USG-GOC coordination.  It is still unclear to some GOC 
officials how best to engage in successful North American H2 
R&D collaboration with the US, which they all agree is very 
desirable.  Post believes that US and Canadian bilateral and 
multilateral cooperation on hydrogen technologies will help 
cement both countries' leading positions in the coming global 
hydrogen economy.  END COMMENT. 
CELLUCCI