This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TF1Z01:  SANAA EAC MARCH 23 
 
REF: SANAA 576 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  The Ambassador convened an Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) March 23 to discuss current threat 
information, enhanced security measures and Embassy security 
posture.  EAC decided to move from StandFast to MoveSafe 
effective 3/23 at the close of business.  Key offices and 
personnel represented at the meeting included: AMB, DCM, 
POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, DATT, ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN, 
FPD and RMO.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
Current Threat Information 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  ORCA reported no new threat information.  ORCA 
and RSO reported that the Political Security Organization 
(PSO) and Ministry of Interior had no indications of any 
upcoming planned demonstrations.  ORCA noted that the PSO 
continues to make arrests in relation to the 3/21 
demonstration that turned violent, including a ROYG move to 
ask the Shura Council and Council of Deputies (the upper and 
lower houses of parliament) for a waiver of immunity for two 
of its members, both Nasserite party members involved in 
organizing and inciting the unauthorized demonstration.  DATT 
briefed on developments with the Iraq war. 
 
¶3.  (C)  EAC discussed what Embassy personnel are hearing 
about popular opinion.  PD reported anecdotal information 
from contacts that Yemeni "street" opinion is rising in 
anger. 
 
--------------------------- 
Increased Security Measures 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  RSO briefed EAC on increased security measures. 
Embassy stood down the 24/7 watchstanders.  The location 
where cars are swept outside the compound was changed to be 
farther away from the street.  Embassy employees other than 
cleared Americans will no longer be allowed to park vehicles 
inside the compound.  ROYG security enhancements and 
responses include: 
 
-- providing additional personnel and equipment to guard the 
Embassy, residences and other Amcit locations such as the 
Sheraton Hotel. 
 
-- ensuring that Iraqi agents are under 24-hour surveillance. 
 
-- working with the Embassy to compile a list of expat 
Americans and their contact information to provide extra 
security. 
 
--attempting to manage public opinion through statements and 
the media to avoid violent reaction. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Embassy Change to MoveSafe 3/23 COB 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S)  EAC decided to alter Embassy's security posture from 
StandFast to MoveSafe effective COB 3/23.  MoveSafe entails 
curtailed operations, limited movement from residence to 
Embassy and to essential meetings and travel exclusively in 
armored vehicles.  Despite the end of StandFast, the Embassy 
will not/not be open to provide visa/consular services to the 
public.  Armored vehicle shuttle services began after EAC to 
ensure a well-staggered departure from the Embassy.  FSNs 
will return to work on 3/24 as normal. 
 
----------------------------------- 
No Request for Authorized Departure 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S)  EAC discussed whether a request should be made to 
move to authorized departure status and deferred making a 
recommendation pending developments.  The issue remains open 
and under active review, and will be discussed further in 
connection with tripwires (particularly the possibility of 
further violent demonstrations in coming days). 
HULL