This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201536Z Nov 03S E C R E T AMMAN 007575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/20/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN SUPPORTS AGREEMENT ON IRAQI POLITICAL 
TRANSITION, BUT WORRIES ABOUT SECURITY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 321138 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  The Ambassador delivered the Secretary's oral 
message on Iraq political transition to FonMin Muasher, who 
said Jordan would have no problem supporting it publicly. 
Muasher added, however, that Jordan wants to see rebuilding 
of Iraq's security infrastructure run in parallel with the 
political process, and does not want the June 2004 transfer 
of sovereignty to become an excuse for a U.S. withdrawal. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------- 
SECRETARY'S ORAL MESSAGE DELIVERED 
 
SIPDIS 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S)  Ambassador on October 19 delivered ref oral message 
from the Secretary to Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher. 
Muasher's Private Office Director Ali al-Ayed, MFA Legal 
Department Head Samer Naber, and PolCouns sat in.  The 
Ambassador outlined the new CPA-IGC agreement, and asked that 
the GOJ express publicly support for the agreement. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
"A STEP FORWARD -- BUT WE HAVE CONCERNS" 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S)  Muasher said the GOJ would have no problem publicly 
supporting the new agreement:  "It is a step forward." 
However, he noted that Jordan has two main concerns.  First, 
he hopes that there will be a real process to rebuild 
security in parallel with the political process. 
"Sovereignty without security" would be a big problem for 
Jordan.  Second, the June transfer of sovereignty and 
dissolution of the CPA "should not be an excuse for 
withdrawal of U.S. forces."  If this agreement makes it 
possible for U.S. and international forces to stay, that is 
good; if it is "just an exit strategy, we have a problem." 
 
¶4.  (S)  The Ambassador assured Muasher that the U.S. is 
working to address both of Jordan's concerns.  First, we have 
a clear strategy to develop Iraqi police, military, and 
security forces, and Jordan -- through police and military 
training -- is playing a key role in that plan.  Second, the 
CPA-IGC agreement clearly states that the coalition will 
maintain substantial forces in Iraq even after transfer of 
sovereignty. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM