This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002457 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/ESP, S/CT, EUR/ERA, INR/EC 
TREASURY FOR ZARATE (EXO), NEWCOMB (OFAC) 
FBI FOR LORMEL 
BRUSSELS ALSO FOR LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2013 
TAGS: ETTC PTER IR IZ
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE: DUTCH PERSPECTIVES ON ADDING 
NCR/NCRI AS AN AKA FOR MEK 
 
REF: A. STATE 240844 
     ¶B. 02 THE HAGUE 2642 
 
Classified By: DCM Daniel R. Russel Reason 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
 ¶1.  (C/NF) Summary: Given the EU's 2002 decision not to 
designate NCR/NCRI, the Dutch believe the USG will have to 
present more evidence of NCR/NCRI ties with MEK before Europe 
is ready to reconsider this decision.  Meanwhile, the Dutch 
have noted indications of MEK fundraising in the Netherlands 
via a front group, Solidariteit met Iraanse Mensen (SIM). 
However, they state they have insufficient proof to move 
forward with a SIM designation.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Dutch reacted to our demarche (ref a) by 
suggesting that to gain agreement in the EU to designate 
NCR/NCRI, the USG would need to provide more detailed 
information indicating these organizations are aliases for 
Mujahedin-e Khalq.  According to the Dutch MFA, an EU 
clearinghouse meeting has not yet been scheduled but 
expectations are the Italian presidency will soon call one to 
consider KADEK. 
 
¶3.  (C) Post notes that the EU considered MEK, NCRI, and NCR 
in September 2002 (ref b) and after some consideration 
decided deliberately to list only MEK. 
 
¶4.  (U) The annual report of the Dutch security service 
(AIVD) indicates that "In the Netherlands, umbrella 
organizations of the MKO (Dutch acronynm for MEK) have been 
active in fundraising, political lobbying, and recruiting new 
sympathizers for, among other things, the struggle with Iran. 
 In (the Netherlands), the foundation Solidariteit met 
Iraanse Mensen (SIM -- Solidarity with the Iranian People) 
collects money for the MKO.  From the AIVD's investigations, 
it became apparent that the allocation of the funds 
maintaining and arming the MKO is in conflict with the 
objectives stated by the SIM.  In the guise of providing 
support to orphaned children in Iran or children who are 
otherwise suffering or have suffered under the iranian 
regime, the SIM attempts to move (convince) people to give 
generously.  Whereas SIM previously limited itself to 
fundraising in public areas (collecting in shopping malls), a 
shift can now be seen toward a direct personal approach of 
potential contributors." 
 
¶5.  (C/NF) MFA officials told Econoff that although the AIVD 
report is definitive in its conclusions, it is backed up with 
insufficient factual evidence to justify a Dutch designation 
of SIM.  MFA told us the AIVD had hoped that a strong public 
statement in itself would cause SIM to scaleback its 
activities here.  There is little indication this has taken 
place. 
SOBEL