This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002387 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS GT
SUBJECT: GT NAVY BRINGS IN 102 STRANDED ILLEGAL ALIENS 
 
¶1. The Guatemalan Navy launched patrol boats in response to 
information from the Embassy's Tactical Analysis Team 
indicating an Ecuadorian vessel, possibly transporting 
narcotics, was stalled 40 nautical miles southwest of 
Guatemala's Puerto Quetzal.  The vessel "Matheus Tollet" was 
intercepted at 0330 local time on September 11, and was found 
to be carrying 102 illegal aliens but no narcotics.  The 
vessel, which has accomodations for a crew of 12, departed 
Ecuardor 13 days earlier and had run out of food and water by 
the time it was intercepted.  The Navy towed the disabled 
vessel to Puerto Quetzal where it was met by Immigration 
Officials, a prosecutor, and Embassy DHS personnel.  The 
illegal aliens are being held at a hotel/shelter in the 
capital for interviews and processing before being 
repatriated.  Some of the aliens may be expelled via the U.S. 
as alien smugglers or material witnesses.  A similar incident 
last year resulted in convictions in Washington, DC against 
four crewmembers. 
 
¶2.  Comment: This is an encouraging demonstration of 
political will on the part of the Government of Guatemala to 
combat smuggling at sea.  As the implementation of our new 
Maritime counternarcotics agreement gets underway, more such 
incidents are likely and the GOG's handling of this one, 
which required no high-level communications to secure GOG 
cooperation, sets a positive precedent. 
HAMILTON