This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR J. BUNTIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON ETRD KU
SUBJECT: KUWAIT: WIRELESS INTERNET SURVEY RESULTS 
 
REF: STATE 85946 
 
The following answers to State's Wireless Internet Survey 
(reftel) are supplied by Engineer AbdulAzziz Mohammad 
Al-Osaimi, Assistant Undersecretary for Information Systems 
at Kuwait's Ministry of Communication, and are keyed to 
questions in reftel para 6. 
 
¶A. Yes, the Government of Kuwait (GOK) has allocated 
unlicensed radio-frequency spectrum for use by Wireless 
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) and similar technologies.  The frequency 
band is 2.4-2.4835 GHz and does not exceed 100 mw.  There are 
no separate allocations for indoor and outdoor use.  The GOK 
is not planning to authorize Wi-Fi services as lower power 
devices without a specific radio-service allocation. 
 
¶B. Wi-Fi can be used without a license in Kuwait, provided 
the Wi-Fi is indoors.  While no licenses are required, users 
must obtain type approval certificates from the Ministry of 
Communication. 
 
¶C. No, Wi-Fi systems cannot be used for commercial purposes 
without a license in Kuwait. 
 
¶D. No, there are not any commercial Wi-Fi networks currently 
operating in Kuwait that provide service to the public. 
 
¶E. Post cannot provide examples of how Wi-Fi is currently 
being used in Kuwait, because nothing has been implemented 
yet for commercial use. 
 
¶F. While several Wi-Fi units have been sold for indoor use, 
few links have been implemented as point-to-point for testing 
purposes.  The GOK could not provide specific numbers for 
indoor use Wi-Fi systems sold in the country. 
JONES