This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR E, EUR/SE AND EB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - MILLS AND LEICHTER 
NSC FOR QUANRUD AND BRYZA 
USDOC FOR 4212/ITA/MAC/OEURA/DDEFALCO 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON EINV TU
SUBJECT: MARKET FIRMS ON Q1 GROWTH 
 
REF: ANKARA 4061 
 
 
 Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Turkish markets rebounded on July 1, 
helped by strong growth figures for the first quarter and a 
perception that relations with both the U.S. and IMF are on a 
positive track, following announcements of both a July 9 IMF 
mission and FM Gul's impending visit to Washington.  The 
Treasury's July 1 auction met its revenue targets, providing 
more than enough cash to meet its USD 4 billion July 2 
redemption.  The government's privatization program also 
received a boost on June 30, with the privatization council's 
decision to okay the sale of the state petrochemical company 
(Petkim) to the controversial Uzan family's Standart Kimya. 
The move surprised most market analysts, who had expected the 
council to veto the deal.  End Summary. 
 
 
---------------- 
 
 
Positive Auction 
---------------- 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) After weakening in recent days on worries about 
delays in implementation of Turkey's IMF program, markets 
firmed on July 1 as they took new heart from perceived 
positive developments in relations with both the U.S. and 
IMF.  Announcement that an IMF team will come to Turkey on 
July 9 to continue work on the fifth review reassured 
investors that a break with the fund is not on the near term 
horizon, while indications that FM Gul will visit Washington 
in the near future also provided hope that U.S.-Turkish 
relations are mending.  Markets benefited too from strong 
growth figures for 2003's first quarter, which at 7.4 percent 
growth in GNP came in above analysts' expectations. 
 
 
¶3. (U) The positive sentiment enabled the Treasury to meet 
its revenue targets in a July 1 auction and stockpile the 
necessary reserves to meet its 5,681 trillion lira (USD 4 
billion) July 2 redemption to the market.  The government 
sold 4.178.3 trillion lira of 413-day debt at a maximum yield 
of 50.96 percent, and 1,904.9 trillion lira in 140-day debt 
at a maximum yield of 44.5 percent.  The yields were close to 
market expectations, but volume exceeded expectations, as 
total net sales reached 6,848 trillion lira, including 
non-competitive bids and sales to public institutions.  With 
the total exceeding tomorrow's redemptions, some analysts 
predict a lira shortage in coming days that could lead the 
lira to appreciate further from its July 1 close of 1.409 
million to the dollar.  Only the stock market did not 
strengthen on July 1, as it slipped slightly to 10,749, down 
1.24 percent, in part as Petkim shares declined following 
approval of its privatization (see below). 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Global Security's chief economist Cem Akyurek told 
us markets have basically concluded that there will be no 
break in the IMF program: the government will continue to 
negotiate, and at the end of the day will "do the minimum 
necessary" to keep things on track.  Akyurek added that more 
importantly "everything else is going well," with progress on 
EU legislation and government determination to take on 
corruption.  Adding to Turkey's attraction are the limited 
number of equally profitable alternative investment 
opportunities.  As a result, some foreign money is returning 
to the country, a decision eased by the market's belief that 
there is no reason for the lira to weaken below 1.45 million 
to the dollar in coming months.  As a result, foreign 
investors figure they can clear 7-8 percent in dollar terms 
over the summer, a figure that cannot be matched elsewhere. 
As for the long bond, one of the longest maturity papers 
issued by Turkey since 2001, Akyurek noted its attractiveness 
as a benchmark issuance with a high degree of liquidity, and 
the opportunities investors expect it to provide for capital 
gains, provided that interest rates continue to decline. 
That attractiveness was reflected in a total bid volume of 
7,587.8 trillion lira. 
 
 
--------------- 
Petkim Approved 
--------------- 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Meanwhile, in a development that surprised most 
market analysts, the Privatization High Council (PHC) set 
aside concerns about the fitness of Uzan-owned Standart Kimya 
and approved its purchase of the state petrochemical company, 
Petkim.  Controversy had surrounded the issue, given the 
Uzans' notoriety and government concerns about the purchase 
price (reftel).  The council apparently concluded, however, 
that the Uzans' earlier dealings with the Privatization 
Administration (PA) were blameless, and that there was no 
legal impediment to the sale.  The decision gives the PA a 
good start on its ambitious USD 4 billion revenue target for 
the year, as it prepares for the sale of the state refinery 
(TUPRAS) and alcohol-tobacco monopoly (TEKEL).  It also 
provides a first sign that in contrast to previous 
governments that paid lip service to the importance of 
privatization but did little in practice, this government is 
actually prepared to carry it out. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Newly released Central Bank figures highlight the 
extent of the bank's activity in recent months.  Dollar 
purchases in May-June totalled USD 2.115 billion, as the bank 
sought to limit volatility in the market and accumulate 
reserves.  The bank announced that it will increase its daily 
purchases to USD 40 million a day in July, for a monthly 
total of USD 880 million 
PEARSON