This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 002437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ZI MDC
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM MORGAN TSVANGIRAI TO SECRETARY POWELL 
 
Post has just received a letter dated December 16 from Morgan 
Tsvangirai, President of the Movement for Democratic Change, 
 
SIPDIS 
addressed to Secretary Powell, whom we know is not in the 
office.  The following is the text-we will send the original 
by pouch to the desk. 
 
Begin text: 
 
Dear General Powell, 
 
Compliments of the season to you, President Bush, and other 
friends in the United States of America who have not 
forgotten the people of Zimbabwe, even as your own country 
faces dire threats to freedom and democracy. 
 
I am writing to extend appreciation on behalf of the Movement 
for Democratic Change and the millions of brave and hungry 
Zimbabweans who tragically know that their struggle for 
justice and true liberation is far from over. 
 
As 2003 draws to a close, we find ourselves far from a 
solution to the catastrophe destroying our country.  As you 
may well know, the hoped- for national dialogue between the 
MDC and the ZANU-PF has largely reached a deadlock. 
 
One area of particular contention is ZANU-PF's youth 
militias.  We strongly believe that the government should 
disband this group as soon as possible.  As you may know, the 
youth militia (known as "Green Bombers") are destabilizing 
the country as well as provoking the country's official 
national security services.  This private ZANU-PF army was 
designed specifically to terrorize not protect and serve the 
Zimbabwean people, particularly those not seen to be ardent 
supporters of the government. 
 
We are very worried about the days to come, yet remain firmly 
committed to achieve democratic change in an organized and 
peaceful way.  In the past year, we have embarked on two 
successful mass stay-aways and expect to work together with 
our colleagues in civil society to continue to pressure for 
new elections under free and fair conditions.  We have stated 
unequivocally that we are prepared to enter dialogue.  As you 
know, I have personally agreed to meet with Mr. Mugabe to 
discuss the future of the country, but he has postponed our 
planned meeting several times.  On 20 December, the MDC will 
hold its annual conference.  At this meeting we will define 
the agenda for 2004, as well as adopt our refined policies. 
 
I understand that Presidents Obasango and Mbeki will be 
visiting Zimbabwe again in the near future.  Realizing the 
holiday season approaches us, I would appreciate an 
opportunity to briefly update you on the situation as we see 
it and to share my thoughts for the way forward at his 
volatile time. 
 
In closing, I also want to thank you for sending such a 
capable and committed team to our country.  Ambassador 
Sullivan and others in his team have certainly demonstrated 
the best of what America stands for and we thank all of you 
again for your support during these very troubled times. 
 
Respectfully yours, 
 
Â¶M. Tsvangirai 
President 
SULLIVAN