This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

070957Z Nov 03UNCLAS ANKARA 006971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR AMBASSADOR BREMER 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAID ETTC PREL IZ TU
SUBJECT: LETTER FOR AMB BREMER FROM TURKISH UNION OF 
CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (TOBB) 
 
 
The following letter addressed to Ambassador Bremer, was 
given to Ambassador Edelman on November 6, 2003 by Rifat 
Hisarciklioglu, President of TOBB, for forwarding to CPA: 
 
 
Begin text of letter: 
 
 
Your Excellency, 
 
 
I have the honor to inform you that we as a delegation from 
the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges (TOBB) of 
Turkey wish to visit Iraq.  TOBB is the umbrella organization 
representing the business community in Turkey.  It has 361 
local chambers in which 1 million 200 thousand companies are 
members.  It is a democratic institution whose management is 
periodically elected. 
 
 
The business community of Turkey has been doing it's best to 
contribute to the post-war reconstruction efforts in Iraq. 
It attaches great importance to the success of this 
enterprise.  It believes that a high priority should be given 
to the improvement of the living conditions and well-being of 
the Iraqi people. 
 
 
TOBB has been encouraging the business community to actively 
participate in the post-war Iraqi reconstruction process. To 
this end, it has organized several events to identify the 
difficulties the businessmen face in doing business in Iraq. 
 
 
The TOBB delegation hopes to visit Iraq as soon as possible 
in order to observe the problems on the spot.  On that 
occasion they would like to meet you and your colleagues, 
members of the Governing Council, Iraqi ministers as well as 
Iraqi business representatives.  Our main objective is both 
to gather first-hand information and build communication 
channels with the Iraqi people so as to be able to guide the 
Turkish business community, contribute to private sector 
development and help civil society institutions in Iraq. 
Therefore we also wish to meet with the representatives of 
Iraqi civil society, chambers, business associations, etc. 
 
 
During this visit we would like to discuss the following 
issues which we consider important to be addressed in the 
short term: 
 
 
a)  Transport safety is still one of the main problems.  Due 
to the security situation, the Turkish companies whose 
contracts were accepted by the UN face difficulties in 
shipment.  A temporary solution, similar to the one applied 
in June, should be introduced.  Goods should be transported 
up to, for instance, Dohuk by Turkish trucks and the risks 
involved taken by the Turkish businessmen while the 
responsibility for the distribution of goods within Iraq will 
be assumed by Iraqi citizens. 
 
 
b)  Operations should be restored and security ensured for 
the Kirkuk-Yumurtalik pipeline in cooperation with BOTAS, 
partner company resident in Turkey. 
 
 
c)  In order to contribute to the private sector development 
in Iraq, we would like to collaborate with our counterparts 
within the framework of Turkish Iraqi Business Council, in 
which the Turkish participants are known, but for the moment 
the Iraqi side is not performing effectively. 
 
 
d)  We would also like to establish a TOBB Liaison Office in 
Baghdad to encourage closer relations between Iraqi and 
Turkish companies. 
 
 
e)  We would like to visit Iraq, if possible, by a Turkish 
Airlines (THY) sheduled flight.  As a means for regular 
contacts between Baghdad and Ankara, however, we expect THY 
to resume its operations to and from Baghdad.  To grant this 
permission would obviously impart a visible symbolic 
significance to our visit to Iraq. 
 
 
f)  Ziraat Bank, which is a publicly owned commercial bank in 
Turkey, would like to establish a branch in Baghdad. 
Granting the necessary permission to Ziraat Bank would be 
greatly appreciated as a gesture on the part of your 
administration. 
 
 
Looking forward to seeing you in Baghdad, please accept, Your 
Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration. 
 
 
Â¶M. Rifat Hisarciklioglu 
President 
 
 
End of text. 
EDELMAN