This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005976 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR: DS/DSS/IP, DS/IP/EUR, DS/DSS,ITA, 
DS/ICI/PII, S/CT, DS/ICI/CI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: THREAT LETTER AGAINST US EMBASSY ACCRA AND MARINE 
CORPS CANTONMENTS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  On July 22, 2003 RSO Frankfurt received an 
unsigned letter, in broken German, warning of Arab planned 
attacks against Marine Corps Cantonment areas and the US 
Embassy housing area in the capital of Ghana.  The timing and 
method of attack(s) is not specified.  The letter was 
received through the German Postal Service and was 
generically addressed to "General Konsulat USA".  The German 
0,55 Euro stamp is postmarked by Briefzentrum 50.  RSO has 
passed the original letter to local authorities. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Below is the German Text of the letter: 
 
General Konsulat USA 
Siesmayerstrasse 21 
60323 Frankfurt 
 
 
Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
 
Warnung vor dem Anschlag gegen US Marines in Cantonments 
 
Arabische Menschen planen einen Anschlag auf Marine Corps 
Angehoerige in der Ghana Haupstadt Accra. In Teil von Accra 
genannt Cantonments wohnen Marine Corps Angehoerige. Das ist 
ein teil von der Zusammenarbeit zwischen Ghana Armed Forces 
und USA. Auf diese wird ein Anschlag gemacht. Eine Idee ist 
auch gleiche Zeit ein Anschlag auf Residence von Stab von US 
Embassy. Das ist aber nicht leicht und noch nicht klar. 
Ghanaische Menschen sind nicht die die planen und 
organizieren. Ein Mann in Nima ist kein Ghanaer aber von 
Burkina Faso. Diese Menschen sind Araber. Ghanaische Menschen 
sind nur mit Geld gekauft um Informationen zu geben. Watchmen 
als Beispiel und arm bezahlte Angerhoerige von Ghana Armed 
Forces (GAF). Aber auch anderen Kontact mit Land. Alle die 
planen kenne ich nicht. Raoul Abou Chedid ist einer und hat 
eine Polystyrene Fabrik in Accra. Sogar nicht alle sind 
Muslim. Aber die Muslim sind halten starken Kontact zwischen 
Trioli/Lebananon und Accra. Es ist Tripoli/Lebanon und nicht 
Tripoli/Libya. Name auch Tarabulus Ash Sham. Befehle kommen 
von Tripoli. Mehr Lebanese Menschen von Tripoli sind ein 
Teil. Wohnen aber als Businessmen in Ghana. Simon Saoud ist 
kein Muslim aber Maronite. Er plant auch nicht aber verteilt 
Hilfe wegen starke Business Beziehung mit Muslim Partner. Er 
ist Sawmiller, Exporter und noch mehr. Am Tema Hafen gibt es 
Gewerbe Coldstore der auch Lebanese gehoert mit Shops und 
Buero. Auch dort sind Treffen. Auch bei andere Orte. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Below is a rough English translation of the text: 
 
Warning of attack against US Marines in Cantonments 
 
Arab people are planning an attack on Marine Corps 
families/friends in Accra, capitol of Ghana. In an area of 
Accra called Cantonments, live Marine Corps families/friends. 
That is a part of the working together between Ghana armed 
forces and USA. On this there will be an attack. One idea is 
that at the same time an attack of the housing area of the US 
Embassy. That is not easy and not yet clear. Ghanaian people 
are not the ones planning and organizing. A man in Nima is 
not Ghanaian but from Burkina Faso. The people are Arabs. 
Ghanaian people are only bought with money to give 
information. For example Watchmen and poorly paid members of 
the Ghanaian armed forces. But also other contact with land 
(country). All the plans I do not know. Raoul Abou Chedid is 
one and has a polystyrene factory in Accra. Even not all are 
Muslim. But all Muslim are having strong contact between 
Tripoli/Lebanon and Accra. It is Tripoli/Lebanon and not 
Tripoli/Libya. Name also Tarabulus Ash Sam. Orders come from 
Tripoli. More Lebanese people from Tripoli are a part. But 
live as businessmen in Ghana. Simon Saoud is not Muslim but a 
Maronite. He (does) not plan but gives help because of a 
strong business relationship with Muslim partner. He is saw 
miller, exporter and much more. On the Tema port there are 
cold store businesses (refrigeration) belonging to Lebanese 
people along with shops and offices. Also here are meetings. 
Also at other places. 
BODDE