This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 000816 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/ESP (GLASS), S/CT, IO/PHO, EUR/SE 
TREASURY FOR GENERAL COUNSEL (AUFHAUSER), TASK FORCE ON 
TERRORIST FINANCING, TREASURY/OFAC (NEWCOMB) 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC EFIN CVIS PTER TU
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE:  TURKEY UPDATE 
 
 
REF: A. A. STATE 20085 
     ¶B. B. STATE 22341 
     ¶C. C. STATE 20908 
     ¶D. D. STATE 20807 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Not for Internet Distribution. 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) On January 30, we met with Turkish MFA coordinator 
for anti-terrorist financing Hakan Okcal to brief him on the 
following recent UN and U.S. designations: 
 
 
Stichting Benevolence International Nederland (a.k.a. 
Benevolence International Nederland); 
 
 
Nabil Abdul Salam Sayadi and Patricia Vinck, from the Belgian 
branch of the Global Relief Foundation/Foundation Secours 
Mondial (GRF/FSM); 
 
 
Nurjaman Riduan Isamuddin (a.k.a. Hambali) and Mohammad Iqbal 
Abdurrahman (a.k.a. Abu Jibril), from the terrorist 
organization Jemaah Islamiyah. 
 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Okcal stated that he would disseminate these 
notifications to the appropriate Turkish agencies.  GOT 
authorities would investigate and act to seize any assets 
related to these individuals and groups.  The MFA would 
include these names in a future Council of Ministers decree 
on terrorist finance organizations.  The last decree was 
passed in late 2002.  Okcal did not foresee any problems 
having these names included in the next decree. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) We also discussed the text of UNSCR 1452, which 
allows for certain exceptions to the asset freeze provisions 
of Security Council resolutions 1267 and 1390.  Okcal said he 
was aware of the recent resolution and has already 
communicated this with the appropriate agencies.  He said 
that he would notify us if the GOT makes any changes under 
the new resolution. 
PEARSON