This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC
SUBJECT: TF1Z01:  SANAA EAC MEETING MARCH 30 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  The Ambassador convened an Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) meeting on March 30 to assess Embassy 
security posture and threat information.  Key offices and 
personnel represented at the meeting included: ADMIN, AMB, 
CONS, DCM, FPD, OMC, ORCA, PD, POL/ECON, RMO and SOC YEMEN. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  ORCA and RSO reported no new threats.  DCM 
briefed on authorized departure procedures. 
 
¶3.  (C)  EAC decided to go to a "MoveSafe Lite" posture 
effective close of business March 30.  EAC decided to change 
its security posture from MoveSafe to more normal operations 
in the absence of new threat information and given the lack 
of large violent demonstrations in the last several days. 
EAC members deemed it essential to adopt a flexible approach 
-- adjusting security measures in response to changing threat 
conditions -- in order to sustain full compliance of 
employees with security conditions throughout the war in 
Iraq, no matter how long it lasts.  Employees are encouraged 
to continue using the armored shuttles, but are allowed to 
drive their own vehicles if they wish to and from work. 
Travel outside of Embassy and residence will remain at the 
discretion of the COM and RSO and be severely limited. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Consular services will be provided on a limited 
basis during a gradual return to a pre-StandFast level of 
operations.  Immigrant visa applications and American 
passport services will be provided on an appointment-only 
basis. 
HULL