This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 004894 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/05/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ECON SOCI JO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR GNEHM DISCUSSES U.S.-GOJ ISSUES WITH 
NEW SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT 
 
REF: A. AMMAN4408 B. AMMAN 4533 C. AMMAN 4577 D. 
     AMMAN 4246 E. AMMAN 4764 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Ambassador Gnehm visited newly elected Speaker of the 
Parliament, Saad Hayel Srour, and discussed issues related to 
the new Parliament including the ongoing debate on temporary 
laws, Iraq, and the peace process and U.S.-Jordanian 
relations.END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------- 
INITIAL PRAISE FOR MPs 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On Saturday, August 2, Ambassador Gnehm and PolOff 
paid a courtesy call on the newly elected Speaker of the 
Parliament, Saad Hayel Srour.  After an initial exchange of 
pleasantries, the Ambassador asked Srour about his views on 
the new Parliament.  Srour confided that although the start 
of the special session had not been easy, things were going 
well and he was happy with the overall level of cooperation 
from members.  He explained that only 20 percent of the new 
members were from the old parliament and this created 
continuity problems but praised new members for their high 
levels of education. 
 
------------------------------------ 
DEBATE AND PASSAGE OF TEMPORARY LAWS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador stressed his strong support for the 
bold steps taken by the GOJ regarding economic reform and 
hoped there would be speedy movement in the Parliament to 
ratify temporary laws related to the economy.  Srour said he 
expected things to go the "right way", and highlighted that 
there is agreement in principle by many MPs to ratify most of 
the temporary laws.  Some 35 temporary laws, he added, have 
been sent to committees for discussion.  Although optimistic, 
he does expect some proposed amendments. 
 
------------------ 
VOTE OF CONFIDENCE 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (C) Srour advised that the Parliament will meet after 
August 6 to debate the new reshuffled government (refs b and 
c) and expected the deliberations to take 4-5 days.  He 
viewed this development as a positive step and one which will 
allow MPs to express to the GOJ their views on the new 
government. 
 
------------ 
ISLAMIST MPs 
------------ 
 
¶5. (C) The Ambassador expressed interest in reaching out to 
all factions in the Parliament, particularly the Islamists. 
He emphasized the need to explain to them about the Embassy's 
programs and how they benefit Jordan.  Srour encouraged the 
Ambassador to reach out to the Islamists.  He described them 
as "difficult" people, while also characterizing some of them 
as politically well educated.  Of the 17 Islamic Action Front 
(IAF) MPs, he classified 2-3 as particularly difficult and 
the rest as moderates.  He said some are willing to talk and 
are not hard to deal with, and promised to encourage them to 
talk with Embassy officials. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
JORDAN'S TWO HEADED SERPENT: OCCUPIED TERRITORIES AND IRAQ 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶6. (C)  On Iraq, the Ambassador told Srour that although 
things have moved slowly, progress is being made though not 
reported by the press.  He said that most of our difficulties 
have been in an area north and west of Baghdad.  The 
situation in the Shi'a south and in the north is much better. 
 The challenge now for the U.S. is to find credible Sunni 
contacts.  He stressed the U.S. wants the Governing Council 
to make the tough decisions.  Srour hoped to see continued 
progress and linked reconstruction in Iraq to an improvement 
in Jordan's economy.  He believes that Jordan's unskilled and 
unemployed workers, which he estimated at between 60-70,000, 
would benefit if economic opportunities opened up in Iraq. 
 
¶7. (C) On the peace process, the Ambassador stated how 
U.S.-Jordanian cooperation positively influenced the 
direction of policy on this issue.  He also focused on the 
close relationship between President Bush and the King. 
President Bush, the Ambassador added, is committed to an 
independent Palestinian state and had pressed PM Sharon on 
settlements and the security fence.  The Palestinians, the 
Ambassador concluded, must keep the peace and fight violence. 
 Srour emphasized how the Palestinian issue had a direct 
impact on Jordan's economy.  If people don't believe or trust 
that there will be progress, he explained, they hold back on 
spending.  If they see hope, they spend their money and 
strengthen the economy.  He felt that both PM Abu Mazen and 
the Palestinian Authority, as well as PM Sharon, could do 
more to explain the delicate issues and highlight progress to 
give people hope. 
 
-------------------------- 
U.S. - Jordanian relations 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C)  The Ambassador again reiterated U.S. government 
support for the King's economic program and highlighted the 
U.S. aid provided to Jordan this year.  Although the level of 
aid would not remain at the same level next year, Ambassador 
Gnehm explained, the U.S. would continue to support the 
King's economic programs so that Jordan's poor could benefit 
from economic progress. 
 
¶9. (C)  Srour expressed concern that American policy is not 
clear to many parliamentarians.  He felt that their 
understanding is often based on what they read in the local 
media, thus their impressions are formed by what the media 
interprets as U.S. policy.  He felt more could be done to 
improve this situation and encouraged the Ambassador to 
connect future visiting CODELS with MPs to establish a 
communication "bridge" between U.S. and Jordanian lawmakers. 
This would further help parliamentarians understand economic 
laws and how they relate to global issues. 
GNEHM