This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001034 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
CAIRO POL FOR MAXSTADT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/12/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV MOPS PINS NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: BENUE REPORT INDICTS NO ONE; OBASANJO 
SAYS  HE CAN DO NO MORE 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1025 
     ¶B. ABUJA 400 
     ¶C. ABUJA 205 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR HOWARD F. JETER; REASONS 1.5 (B) 
AND (D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) During a June 11 meeting, President Obasanjo and 
Ambassador discussed GON efforts to address U.S. concerns 
over the October 2001 Benue incident.  Ambassador Jeter 
noted that Nigeria had lost USD 12.8 million in 
"opportunity" bilateral security assistance because of 
Congressional sanctions.  Obasanjo said he had recently 
received a copy of the Commission of Inquiry's report, but 
had not read it yet.  When the Ambassador commented that we 
had heard the report did not indict specific individuals 
(REF A), Obasanjo exclaimed, "We cannot do more than we 
have done.  If this will break our relationship, so be it." 
(COMMENT: Obasanjo gave the Ambassador his copy of the 
report from which we confirmed that the Commission did not 
recommend criminal prosecution against any specifically 
identified individuals.  The Commission's mandate did not 
extend to the initiation of criminal proceedings - it could 
only make recommendations.  Even this, it did not do.  END 
COMMENT.) 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Obasanjo and recently appointed Chief of Defense 
Staff GEN Alexander Ogomudia, who also attended the 
meeting, were adamant on this issue.  During an aside 
before Obasanjo arrived, Ogomudia told the Ambassador that 
he wished he could speak with the members of Congress "who 
still have misgivings about Zaki-Biam."  Alluding to recent 
U.S. military action in Iraq where innocent civilians were 
killed or seriously injured, Ogomudia said that sometimes 
governments had to take actions that inevitably hurt 
innocent people.  The GON had to respond with force in 
Zaki-Biam. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) COMMENT: This line of reasoning has been the GON's 
constant refrain.  While most government officials will 
acknowledge the soldiers at Zaki-Biam went much too far, 
they are loathe to hold specific individuals culpable 
because, in the final analysis, they believe the military 
had to act.  Moreover, an attempt to indict soldiers might 
cause unrest in the barracks and this is something Obasanjo 
has to avoid.  While Obasanjo was concerned about the 
effects of Congressional sanctions on bilateral security 
assistance, his statements indicate that he will not 
personally intervene further on the Benue issue.  END 
COMMENT. 
JETER