This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO PGOV IZ HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IMMUNITIES, JULY 16, 2003 
 
 
¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" on 
7/16 entitled "No way of winning". "Let's see how things work in 
Honduras: if the Honduran politicians don't put the ball through 
the basket they lose, and if they do it they lose too. A group of 
Congressmen got together after receiving a great deal of 
criticism, and in a moment of despair or irritation they decided 
to take away immunities from everybody. It's worth to point out 
that this has just been an announcement, there's nothing official 
yet, but as usual the decision making in Honduras is like a 
pendulum, moving back and forth." 
 
"This has been the case on the issue of immunities. The 
Constitution includes a broad definition of it, pretending to 
embrace everything, but it has resulted on a continuous abuse of 
this privilege, until the bubble burst. Once it burst, they 
decided to take an extreme measure: eliminate immunities for 
everybody." 
 
"We believe it's necessary to limit immunities exclusively to 
perform the duties of key public officials. It shouldn't be too 
broad to protect civil servants from civil lawsuits or criminal 
prosecution." 
 
¶2. Article in San Pedro Sula-based daily "Tiempo" on 7/16 
entitled "The elimination of immunity will only benefit 
criminals". "Olban Valladares and Toribio Aguilera, Congressmen 
representing the Innovation and Unity Party, declared that the 
elimination of immunities will only benefit organized crime, 
narco trafficking and a group of 12 untouchable entrepreneurs who 
have become rich through illegal activities." 
 
"They insisted that the abolition of immunities will affect many 
public officials, such as Congressmen, judicial agents, 
prosecutors, judges, members of the Superior Court and other 
officials of the Executive branch." 
 
"They believe it's essential to adjust the immunities law, to 
protect the officials of the Judicial, Executive and Legislative 
branch, and the Public Ministry during their duties as civil 
servants." 
 
 
Palmer