This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001484 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA,(MBUCKLEY; MPROCTOR); IIP/G/WHA (DDIPASQUALE) 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON JUSTICE AND SECURITY, JUNE 24, 
2003 
 
¶1. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily "La Prensa" 
on 6/24 entitled "Congress will request the removal of the 
Minister of Security, the Attorney General and the President 
of the Supreme Court". "The President and the Secretary of 
Congress are so displeased with the limited results of the 
fight against criminality that they will request the removal 
of several high-ranking governmental officials." 
 
Juan Orlando Hernandez, Secretary of Congress stated, "In a 
short-term, Congress will request from these officials an 
explanation of what is going wrong, also ask them if 
Congress should do anything to help. We must demand them to 
act immediately, and if they do not do anything having the 
conditions to do their job, we will talk to President Maduro 
to promote changes, if necessary." 
 
He added, "We cannot wait anymore for actual results. the 
people is in shock, to the point they believe the government 
is not doing enough to fight criminality and Congress is 
demanding to act promptly and vigorously to stop impunity in 
the country." 
 
¶2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" 
on 6/24 entitled "President Maduro acknowledges that police 
forces are infiltrated". "President Maduro is well aware his 
police force is infiltrated with criminals and needs to be 
amended as soon as possible, acknowledging this is one of 
the topics less attended to that should have been done 
otherwise. After meeting with the President of Congress, 
Porfirio Lobo Sosa, Maduro announced a new law was being 
enacted that would pursue the lawless policemen in the force 
and give them a fair trial." 
 
 
Palmer