This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 002917 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMPI KPAO EAID ECON PREL YM DEMOCRATIC REFORM ECON COM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: MEPI FY 2003 FUNDING RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 337476 
     ¶B. SANAA 1599 
 
¶1. (u) Post warmly welcomes the MEPI FY 03 funding 
recommendations (ref a) and is pleased that Yemen is strongly 
represented across the pillars.  At the same time, Post would 
appreciate being considered for the following programs: 
 
Economic Pillar: Post requests that Yemen be considered for 
Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) development as part of the 
Middle East Finance Corporation.   Because SMEs constitute 96 
percent of the private sector in Yemen, their development is 
vital to the continued growth of the country's economy (ref 
b). 
 
Education Pillar: Post requests that Yemen be included in the 
"Partnership Schools" program.  Reftel b explains the 
inadequacies of Yemen's educational system.  In sum: Yemen's 
schools are ill-suited to meet the needs of a growing 
population and developing economy: teachers are poorly 
trained, qualified English language instructors are rare, and 
technology is not yet used in most classrooms. 
 
Women's Pillar: Post welcomes MEPI strategic thinking on 
women's issues and believes Yemen will be fertile ground for 
continued focus on women's development. 
 
¶2. (u) Comment:  MEPI funding in Yemen has been successful in 
strengthening democratic processes and will soon bring 
internet connectivity to ten schools and increase women's 
literacy.  Post looks forward to the development 
opportunities the FY 03 allocations will bring.  End Comment. 
HULL