This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
Â¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR PGOV SOCI KJUS VM
SUBJECT: NAM CAM RECEIVES TWO DEATH SENTENCES, GVN OFFICIALS 
RECEIVE 4-10 YEARS 
 
REF:  A) HCMC 00189    B) HCMC 00492 
 
The high-profile trial of 155 individuals involved in 
organized crime associated with Truong Van Cam (a.k.a. Nam 
Cam) drew to a close on June 5 with a three-hour recitation of 
their sentences.  As rumored, the underworld kingpin Nam Cam 
received two death sentences (by firing squad) for murder and 
bribery, as well as a total of 42 years in jail for five other 
crimes.  The three high-ranking GVN officials who were 
convicted all received prison sentences: 
 
a) Pham Sy Chien, former deputy head of the Supreme People's 
Prosecution Panel in Hanoi (6 years); 
 
b) Bui Quoc Huy, Deputy Minister of Public Security in Hanoi 
during July-August 2002 and former Director of Ho Chi Minh 
City Police during 1996-2001 (4 years); 
 
c) Tran Mai Hanh, former Director of the Voice of Vietnam 
State Radio and General Secretary of the Vietnamese Journalist 
Association (10 years). 
 
These three former GVN officials are still at large and have 
three months to appeal their sentences to the Supreme People's 
Court in Hanoi before being arrested.  Thirteen of the 
defendants in jail were released for time served, and the 
remainder of those currently in jail still have the right to 
appeal.  A total of six death sentences and five life 
sentences were handed down.  Two journalists were found guilty 
of receiving bribes and were sentenced to 10-12 years.  There 
was a noticeable increased plainclothes security presence in 
the HCMC People's Court courtyard, where a crowd of onlookers 
had gathered to hear the sentencing.  Contacts from yesterday 
were more inhibited today about offering their opinions.  Post 
will report septel in greater detail. 
YAMAUCHI