This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 001191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/IP, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/27/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING MAY 27 
 
REF: STATE 137077 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary:  The Ambassador convened an Emergency 
Action Committee (EAC) meeting on May 27 to assess Embassy 
security posture in light of recent unspecified threat 
information.  Post is working closely with ROYG to review 
security, and continues to endorse the return of minor 
dependents.  EAC also discussed confusion surrounding the 
text of a recent travel warning.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)   Key offices and personnel represented at the 
5/27 EAC meeting included: ADMIN, AMB, CONS, DCM, FPD, 
LEGATT, MSG, OMC, ORCA, PD, POL/ECON, RSO, and SOC YEMEN. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  LEGATT, ORCA, and RSO reported ongoing efforts to 
clarify unspecified threat information recently provided by a 
U.S. law enforcement agency.  Post has identified no specific 
area of concern based on this information, and numerous 
security enhancements are already in place including 
increased security at the Hadda and Tourist City compounds 
and the Sheraton Hotel.  Efforts are underway to seek 
clarification of the information. 
 
---------------- 
Minor Dependents 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  In light of recent events in the region, members 
of the EAC reviewed and upheld post's decision to recommend 
the return of minor dependents.  Several participants noted 
the impossibility of proving a negative, i.e. that no 
terrorist strike against U.S. interests would occur in Yemen, 
despite the absence of information indicating a current 
threat.  The Ambassador noted that work undertaken to enhance 
the security posture of U.S.-related sites after the attacks 
in Riyadh and Casablanca demonstrates the continuing 
effectiveness of security cooperation with ROYG authorities. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  The EAC noted that, in March 2002, post requested 
and received approval for the return of adult dependents. 
Eighteen months later the security measures employed by Post 
with ROYG cooperation have proven effective.  No adult 
dependent has been targeted, victimized, or identified as a 
security liability.  Post reiterates its recommendation for 
the return of minor dependents. 
 
-------------- 
Travel Warning 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  EAC members expressed concern over confusion 
caused by a recent travel warning announcing the cancellation 
of authorized departure while reiterating advice to American 
citizens to leave Yemen.  Some Embassy contacts apparently 
interpreted this announcement as an indication of a new 
threat and a signal of the Embassy's eminent closure.  EAC 
members will review the text of the announcement to identify 
areas that should be considered for revision. 
 
HULL