This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 001115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, L, PM/AT 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL KTIA PGOV MOPS CE MV KICC
SUBJECT:  ICC:  Entry into force of non-surrender of 
nationals agreements 
 
Refs:  (A) SA/INS/Colombo 06-21-03 class email 
 
-      (B) Colombo 637, and previous 
 
(U) This message is Sensitive but Unclassified -- Please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Per Ref A, Mission was asked to review 
whether Sri Lanka's and the Maldives' International 
Criminal Court (ICC) non-surrender of nationals 
agreements with the U.S. have entered into force.  The 
situation is the following: 
 
--  Sri Lanka:  The Sri Lankan MFA has confirmed that 
the ICC Article 98 non-surrender accord it signed with 
the U.S. in November 2002 has received the required 
Cabinet approval for entry into force.  The accord, 
however, is currently being cleared by the appropriate 
GSL ministers as a formality.  Mission has provided the 
GSL a dipnote confirming that the agreement is in force 
in the U.S.  The Foreign Secretary said the GSL would 
reply after interagency clearance, expected to take no 
more than two weeks.  We will follow up, if necessary. 
 
--  Maldives:  The Maldivian MFA has confirmed that the 
non-surrender accord it signed with the U.S. in early 
April is in force.  Mission has provided the GoRM a 
dipnote confirming that the agreement is in force in the 
U.S.  We expect a similar dipnote from the Maldivian 
government shortly. 
 
¶2.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
CAMP