This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 001711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL REACTS TO SYNAGOGUE BOMBINGS 
 
 
REF: ISTANBUL 1703 
 
 
¶1. (sbu) Summary: Istanbul is still stunned by the shock and 
horror of Saturday's synagogue bombings.  The overwhelming 
response has been to view this as a senseless and 
unjustifiable attack, not merely against Turkey's small 
Jewish community, but against Turkey itself.  Despite 
widespread speculation and uncertainty about possible 
perpetrators and motives, the general consensus among our 
contacts is that the attacks are unlikely to have a 
significant impact either on Turkish domestic politics or 
foreign policy.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (u) An Attack Against All Turks: The casualty figures from 
the synagogue bombings now indicate that 23 people were 
killed and over 300 wounded (reftel).  Only 6 of those killed 
were members of the Jewish community, although community 
officials tell us that one other member remains in critical 
condition.  Chief Rabbi Isak Haleva himself was lightly 
injured on one hand and his son suffered more serious wounds 
to his face.  Although the synagogues and the Jewish 
community were clearly the intended target, most Turks with 
whom we have spoken feel that the attacks were simply attacks 
against Turkey.  Noting that most of the victims were Muslim 
bystanders and security personnel, men-on-the-street condemn 
the senseless violence and express solidarity with their 
Jewish fellow citizens.  The Jewish community, living under 
constant terrorist threats, was horrified by the scale of the 
attacks, but not particularly surprised by the attacks 
themselves. 
 
 
¶3. (u) Government Responds: Turkish officials have responded 
quickly to the attacks.  Accompanied by several ministers, 
Prime Minister Erdogan toured the damaged synagogues, visited 
victims in the hospitals, and made a courtesy call on Chief 
Rabbi Haleva and the community leadership.  The Prime 
Minister has been widely quoted as vowing to find the 
perpetrators of the attacks and to "continue fighting 
terrorism in the international arena." Investigators have 
taken control of the sites, gathered evidence, and are 
following up on the available leads.  The press reported, for 
example, that a few suspects had been taken into custody, but 
later reported that these suspects have since been released. 
 
 
¶4. (u) Investigation: Although the investigations are still 
in the early phases, many think that the attacks were 
instigated from abroad.  Press reports indicate that an 
Al-Qaeda-affiliated group has claimed credit for the attacks. 
 Authorities are now more or less convinced that each attack 
was carried out by suicide bombers using small trucks with 
fake license plates carrying 300-400 kilograms of explosives. 
 It remains unclear to what degree local actors may have been 
involved in the planning and execution of the attacks.  Most 
Turks remain puzzled about the possible motives for such an 
attack, but most of the speculation focuses on possible anger 
directed against Turkey's close relationship with Israel and 
the U.S. and its complicity with regard to the volatile 
situations in Iraq and the Palestinian territories. 
 
 
¶5. (sbu) Impact on Turkish Politics: Noted political experts 
are waiting to see what impact the bombings will have on the 
government's policies.  Cengiz Candar, columnist for Tercuman 
daily newspaper, told poloff that it is too soon to say for 
sure whether the attacks will have a long-term impact.  He 
noted that it will be important to see to what extent 
domestic groups or organizations were involved in the 
attacks.  Candar commented, however, that if the motive was 
to drive a wedge between Turkey and Israel, it may well have 
the opposite effect.  Ismet Berkan, editor and columnist for 
Radikal daily newspaper, said that he doesn't see any 
likelihood that the bombings will create domestic problems 
for the government or affect the general direction of its 
policies.  Sabanci University Professor Ali Carkoglu was more 
concerned, noting that anti-AK elements may try to use any 
links uncovered with domestic Islamic extremists to attack 
the government.  He added that public support for 
Turkish-Israeli relations was always "thin" at best; more 
such attacks could prompt criticism and a public debate on 
the subject. 
 
 
¶6. (sbu) Comment: Some are already postulating absurd 
MOSSAD/CIA conspiracy theories.  Others are using the attacks 
to criticize Turkey's relationships with Israel and the U.S. 
It will be impossible to convince purveyors of these views to 
change.  However, investigators and others in decision-making 
positions appear to accept that Al-Qaeda or some similar 
terrorist group has targeted Turkey.  This is not the first 
time, of course, that Turkey has been the victim of terrorist 
attacks, but it does bring the U.S.-led "war on terror" a lot 
closer to home. 
ARNETT