This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301432Z Dec 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007984 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: GROWING TURKISH REACTION, PUBLIC CRITICISM OF U.S. 
DETENTION OF TURKISH SOLDIERS IN NORTHERN IRAQ 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
 
¶1. Negative reaction by the Turkish Government, 
opposition politicians, and the press to the reported 
detention of 11 Turkish Special Forces troops in 
Northern Iraq continues to grow.  Prime Minister 
Erdogan, describing the incident as "extremely 
distressing," said that he expects the situation to be 
resolved "by this evening."  Foreign Minister Gul 
called the action "unacceptable," and a Foreign 
Ministry statement noted that it could "have impacts on 
our relations with the United States."  Several 
opposition leaders have spoken out against the U.S. 
operation and called for the immediate release of the 
Turkish detainees.  True Path Party (DYP) leader Mehmet 
Agar called on the Foreign Minister to cancel his 
upcoming trip to the United States.  End Summary. 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
GOT EXPRESSES ANGER AT U.S. ACTION 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. PM Erdogan reacted strongly to reports that U.S. 
forces had detained Turkish special forces team members 
operating in Northern Iraq.  Speaking to journalists 
this morning, Erdogan characterized the incident as 
"extremely distressing" and "unacceptable." Erdogan 
asserted that "this attitude by an allied country 
against its ally cannot be explained."  Later in the 
day, the PM noted that he "hopes the situation will be 
resolved by this evening."  In a written statement 
released this afternoon, the Foreign Ministry expressed 
"profound sorrow" at the incident."  The statement 
noted Turkish efforts to resolve the situation through 
FM's Gul's phone call to Secretary Powell and TGS Chief 
General Ozkok's call to SACEUR General Jones.  The 
Ministry called on all Turkish soldiers to be released 
immediately, and for the United States to investigate 
and take "necessary action" against U.S. personnel 
responsible for the action.  The statement concluded by 
predicting that the incident could have "negative 
impacts" on Turkey's relations with the United States. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
OPPOSITION LEADER CALLS ON GUL TO CANCEL U.S. TRIP 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
¶3. Mehmet Agar, leader of the opposition True Path 
Party (DYP), claimed that this is "the first time that 
the military in one NATO country took prisoners from 
another NATO country's military."  Urging the GOT to 
protest the action "immediately and vehemently," Agar 
said that "under these circumstances" FM Gul should 
"rethink" his planned visit to Washington and, if 
necessary, "cancel it."  Agar said that Turkey must 
"never accept this kind of treatment."  He blamed the 
GOT for its "mistakes," and hypothesized that "we 
wouldn't be faced with such a problem if we had sent 
our troops into Northern Iraq last December."  Agar 
predicted that "even worse developments" could be 
expected.  Muhsin Yazicioglu, leader of the National 
Unity Party (BBP) (not represented in parliament), 
described the U.S. action as "insolent," and called for 
the Turkish detainees to be freed immediately. 
Yazicioglu said the U.S. approach was "very dangerous," 
and accused the United States of acting as a "jandarma 
trying to intimidate other independent states." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
COMMENTATORS: U.S. TRYING TO REMOVE TURKS FROM IRAQ 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
 
¶4. Press commentary on the alleged incident has also 
been sharply negative.  The influential all-news cable 
channel NTV asserted that the "real reason" behind the 
incident is the growing U.S. discomfort with the 
presence of Turkish special forces in Iraq.  The 
commentary claims that PUK leader Talabani has been 
pressuring the United States for some time to "remove 
Turkish soldiers from the region."  The report further 
claimed that U.S. forces had asked Turkish special 
forces to close down its liaison bureaus in 
Suleymaniye, Erbil, and Dohuk, and had requested 
special teams to "withdraw" from the area.  NTV 
concluded its commentary by saying that Ankara finds it 
"unacceptable that Turkish soldiers working in 
consultation with the U.S. military and Kurdish 
officials in the region were targeted instead of the 
thousands of armed terrorists whose weapons are 
directed against Turkey." 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SPONTANEOUS PROTEST OUTSIDE EMBASSY GATE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. The reported incident also sparked a spontaneous 
demonstration outside the embassy gates this afternoon. 
A small group of demonstrators gathered to chant anti- 
American slogans before dispersing about 20 minutes 
later.  Well-known leftist troublemaker Dogu Perincek 
showed up to play to the cameras and slam the U.S. 
This marks the first such demonstration since the early 
days of the war in Iraq.  ConGen Istanbul informed the 
embassy that a similar demonstration led by a labor 
group was held this afternoon near the Consulate.