This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          APRIL 08, 2003 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for April 08, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2.  Milliyet: Osman Ocalan, the brother of PKK 
leader Abullah Ocalan, announced to Reuters that 
the war on Iraq created a new opportunity for the 
PKK, which now seeks to benefit from 
disagreements between Washington and Ankara. 
Osman Ocalan was interviewed by a Reuters' 
reporter in PKK/KADEK camp at Kandil Mountain in 
northern Iraq.  He claimed the disagreement that 
resulted by Ankara's refusal of the motion gave 
them an opportunity to push their issues forward, 
and assessed that it would be possible for the 
PKK to establish ties with the US.  He expressed 
his wish to form an alliance with Washington. 
 
 
¶3.  Cumhuriyet/Evrensel/Tercuman/Milli Gazete: It 
is reported that some of the 12 Patriot missiles 
unloaded at Iskenderun port and forwarded on to 
Incirlik AFB will be deployed at the Turkish 
border, while others will be deployed in northern 
Iraq. Meanwhile, 42 trucks that left the base in 
Kiziltepe (Mardin) also arrived in Iskenderun. 
"Explosive Material" and "Ammunition" signs were 
seen on some of the containers.  Following the 
conclusion of the movement from the bases in the 
Mardin industrial zone, the rented facilities 
will be turned over to the owners again. 
 
 
¶4.  Sabah: Iskenderun will become the center for 
transportation of food items to be exported to 
Iraq under the oil-for-food program administered 
by the United Nations. An independent company, 
Cotegna, which has been selected by the UN, will 
start working in Iskenderun to coordinate the 
deliveries. Turkish firms interested in exporting 
to Iraq will also apply to the office in 
Iskenderun. It is reported that about 250 trucks 
will carry foodstuffs from Iskenderun to Iraq on 
a daily basis. Because the Habur border gate to 
northern Iraq is sealed, the foodstuffs are being 
kept in warehouses rented in Gaziantep for the 
time being. 
 
 
¶5.  Radikal: The UN expedited its shipment of 
food items to civilians in northern Iraq under 
the World Food Program. One thousand tons of 
flour was shipped to Dohuk last week, and more 
shipment of food items continued the previous 
night and today, too. The authorities announced 
that most of the shipment of 6 thousand tons of 
flour had been accomplished, and the shipments 
would continue as needed. The UN has dispatched 
100 trucks of food items to northern Iraq since 
last week. 
 
 
¶6.  Radikal/Milli gazete: American doctors, who 
evacuated their logistical support center in 
Mardin, made rounds at the State Hospital in 
Mardin. It is claimed that the Americans have 
been doing such a study in order to evaluate the 
possibility of bringing their wounded troops to 
the hospital. The police visiting the hospital 
afterwards determined that the US doctors had not 
obtained permission from the governor's office to 
visit the hospital. The police informed local 
officials of the case. 
 
 
¶7.  Turkiye/Bolge: Based on a tip, the police 
arrested 11 persons on alleged membership in a 
gang involved in extortion in Tarsus township of 
Mersin. Three pistols of assorted make and 
radius, one automatic hunting gun, and various 
promissory notes were seized on the suspects, who 
were ordered held by the court. 
 
 
¶8.  Turkiye: Jandarmas searching some houses in 
the hamlet of Dogan (Diyarbakir) seized 3 
unlicensed Kalashnikovs, 371 bullets for that 
weapon, and 32 pistol bullets.  They arrested 
three persons in connection with the weapons. 
 
 
¶9.  Turkiye: Jandarma teams arrested a Hizbullah 
member in Kabasakal hamlet near Ergani 
(Diyarbakir). His name had previously been found 
in a computer disc seized during an operation in 
Istanbul in 2000. The interrogation of the 
Hizbullah member, whose name has not been 
disclosed, is continuing. 
 
 
¶10.  Turkiye: 24 Afghan nationals who had 
illegally passed into Turkey were arrested in 
Ozalp township of Van. An investigation is 
underway. 
 
 
¶11.  Milliyet/Tercuman: The number of families in 
Yenikoy hamlet near Siverek (Sanliurfa), dropped 
from 15 to 3 due to ongoing blood feud that 
stemmed from land dispute between the Gurkan and 
Gurkmen families of the "Kiran" tribe five years 
ago. Some 13 people have been killed in the fight 
between the two families who, as a consequence of 
the feud, were unable to cultivate their land or 
send their children to school. While many people 
have evacuated the village, the remaining 
inhabitants, mostly women and children, have 
built positions on the roofs of their houses and 
reinforced their doors and windows to guard 
against possible attacks. 
HOLTZ