This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 002337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2010 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ YM KICC
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S 9/16 MEETING WITH FM QIRBI: IRAQ; 
ARTICLE 98; DIPLOMATIC POUCH 
 
REF: SANAA 1450 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for reasons 1.5 (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a 9/16 meeting with Ambassador, FM Qirbi 
said Yemen would welcome a visit by the Iraqi Governing 
Council "at any time."  He expressed Yemeni support for early 
return of Iraqi sovereignty, and proposed a dialogue to 
engage AL member states constructively in the process.  Qirbi 
suggested a meeting between the Arab Group and Secretary 
Powell on the margins of the UNGA as a possible way to open 
such a dialogue.  In response to Ambassador's push for Yemeni 
action on Article 98, Qirbi offered no substantive reply but 
said he would be prepared to re-engage on the issue soon. 
After detailed discussion of the failed 8/31 diplomatic 
support flight, Qirbi agreed to a return flight on 10/5 and 
pledged full Yemeni support.  Action requests paras 8 and 11. 
 End Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
Yemen Days 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador began by briefing Qirbi on the success of 
the 9/4-5 Yemen Days cultural festival at the Smithsonian, 
which drew crowds far in excess of expectations.  On the 
margins of the event Yemeni Human Rights Minister al-Soswa 
and former PM al-Iryani had productive meetings with senior 
U.S. officials, and a Yemeni business delegation also had 
useful contacts. 
 
¶3. (C) Qirbi hailed the Yemen Days event as a significant 
step toward correcting Yemen's undeserved negative image. 
Later in the meeting he also expressed the ROYG's protest at 
the extreme delays and harsh treatment some of the Yemeni 
businessmen received at Dulles Airport.  Ambassador 
underscored efforts the Department made to ensure smooth 
airport transit for people and materiel arriving in 
Washington for Yemen Days, and apologized for the delays and 
hassles that did occur.  He pledged that the Embassy would in 
future redouble its effort to avoid security-related delays 
for Yemeni officials and others visiting the United States at 
USG invitation, but that the continuing need for heightened 
homeland security made this difficult to guarantee. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Iraq: Door is Open for IGC Visit to Yemen 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (C) Ambassador noted that Deputy Secretary Armitage had 
raised the recent postponement of a planned visit to Yemen by 
representatives of the Iraqi Governing Council.  Qirbi said 
the delay had come from the Iraqi side as a result of 
internal political developments and security issues.  Qirbi 
stressed that "they are welcome at any time," and that 
Yemen's embassy in Baghdad was prepared to coordinate 
scheduling.  Qirbi said he understood the IGC was studying an 
early visit to Qatar, Yemen and Sudan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Qirbi: Need for U.S.-AL Dialogue on Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5. (C) Qirbi expressed satisfaction with the decision by the 
Arab League ministerial to seat Iraqi FM Zebari.  Qirbi said 
he had useful discussions with Zebari in Cairo, and said he 
hoped AL acceptance would help the IGC "get things moving" in 
Iraq.  Yemen's position is not mere acceptance of the interim 
Iraqi government, but active support for constructive 
measures to hasten the return of full Iraqi sovereignty. 
This is because ROYG sees the integrity and stability of Iraq 
as crucial for the stability of the region. 
 
¶6. (C) Accordingly, said Qirbi, now that the IGC has received 
"universal recognition by the Arabs" the time has come for 
dialogue on Iraq between AL members and the occupying 
authorities in Iraq.  He observed that the Secretary's 
remarks in Baghdad, especially on the need for a UN role, had 
been positive, but argued that international engagement 
should include a role for the Arab League.  The coalition 
should engage the Arabs in advancing the return of 
sovereignty, said Qirbi, and aim to keep shared national 
objectives, rather than narrow ethnic or religious 
affiliations, at the forefront of the process inside Iraq. 
 
¶7. (C) Qirbi suggested that one possible framework for 
opening such a dialogue would be a meeting between the Arab 
Group and Secretary Powell on the margins of the UNGA.  In 
addition, Saleh might raise it with CINC Abizaid on his 
(9/20) visit to Yemen. 
 
-------------------------- 
USG Visits to Yemen 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Ambassador briefed Qirbi on upcoming visits to Yemen 
by CINC Abizaid (9/20), FBI Director Mueller (9/28) and 
possibly NEA A/S Burns (10/3 or 4).  FM Qirbi welcomed the 
visits, but noted that he would not return from the UNGA 
until 10/4, and asked that A/S Burns coordinate his timing to 
allow for that return. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Diplomatic Pouch/Support Flights 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) Ambassador expressed serious USG concern over Yemen's 
non-cooperation with the 8/31 diplomatic support flight, 
stressing that Deputy Secretary Armitage had raised the issue 
with Iryani in Washington.  After extended discussion, Qirbi 
agreed to the scheduling of a return flight on 10/5 and 
pledged full Yemeni cooperation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Article 98: ROYG Still reviewing Options 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶10. (C) The Ambassador urged Qirbi to focus actively on the 
ICC issue and move quickly toward concluding an Article 98 
agreement.  He stressed the need for this important follow-up 
to U/S Bolton's June visit.   Qirbi noted that the Yemeni 
Parliament had not ratified the ICC convention, and said the 
ROYG was still reviewing the materials provided by Embassy 
Sanaa (reftel and previous).  He undertook to renew 
discussion of the issue soon with Ambassador.  (Note: In a 
9/15 meeting with DCM, MFA Under Secretary Hussein Taher bin 
Yahia noted that "several levels" of the ROYG were studying 
the Article 98 question.  He indicated that some were 
concerned at the obviously one-sided benefit that such an 
agreement would impart, but predicted movement in the near 
term.  End Note.) 
 
------------ 
Comment 
------------ 
 
¶11. (C) Despite Yemen's limited regional influence, FM Qirbi 
has made positive efforts on Iraq, including advocacy leading 
to the AL decision to seat the Iraqi delegation.  We believe 
his proposal of a NY meeting to engage Arab states 
constructively in Iraq is sincere and well intended.  We 
recommend serious consideration and welcome feedback. 
 
HULL