This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 008321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPAL KISL IS JO
SUBJECT: ANTINORMALIZERS IN JORDAN RALLY AGAINST GENEVA 
ACCORD 
 
REF: AMMAN 08122 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  The unofficial Geneva accord -- particularly its 
provisions dealing with the Palestinian right to return -- is 
the latest cause celebre for antinormalizers in Jordan.  The 
Professional Associations Council in Jordan -- headed by a 
prominent Muslim Brotherhood member -- is leading the charge 
against the accord, organizing rallies and a petition 
campaign that reportedly has gathered 10,000 signatures so 
far.  The group is sending the message that if, down the 
road, Jordan's official support becomes more than merely 
rhetorical, it is in for a public challenge.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
OPPOSITION: NO COMPROMISE ON RIGHT OF RETURN, EVER 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Following up on strong public statements condemning 
the accord after the much-publicized (and debated) ceremony 
in Geneva on December 1 (reftel), the 14-member Professional 
Associations Council (PAC) has made good on its pledge to 
organize events opposing the accord.  The PAC on December 14 
sponsored a conference in al-Baq'aa refugee camp -- the 
largest in Jordan -- which attracted more than 600 PAC 
members, representatives of opposition parties, and activists 
from across the political spectrum, according to press 
reports.  The participants issued a statement at the end of 
the conference rejecting the initiative and emphasizing the 
Palestinian refugees' right to return to their original 
homeland.  The statement also called for armed struggle 
against the occupation, saying force is the only viable 
option. "Those who signed the accord represent only 
themselves and not the Palestinian people." 
 
¶3.  (U)  The statement added that the accord "compromises 
Palestinian rights," and that all attempts at resettlement of 
refugees and compensation are unacceptable.  Many of the 
participants also signed a petition rejecting the accord and 
other attempts at "depriving Palestinians' of their just 
claim to their homeland."  The petition thus far has over 
10,000 signatures, a PAC official said in a press interview. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Activists attended a similar rally on December 13 at 
the Professional Associations Complex, blasting the accord 
and its authors, demanding that they be tried in public.  The 
rally, which also featured national Palestinian songs and 
music, urged the Arab public to join in condemning the 
initiative and to reject all settlement deals that aim at 
"liquidating the Palestinian cause."  "The right of our 
people to return to their homeland is sacred and we will not 
compromise or negotiate that right," PAC President and MB 
member Wael Saqqa declared in an interview. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Members of the 14-member PAC serve as the backbone 
of the disparate antinormalization movement in Jordan, which 
advocates terminating Jordan's peace treaty with Israel and 
spans all levels of society -- from the refugee camps to 
Jordan's lower house of parliament.  The initiative has 
provided the antinormalizers another reason to challenge the 
government about its unpopular peace treaty with Israel.  The 
group also seems to be sending a message to the GOJ that it 
is in for a public challenge if, down the road, Jordan's 
official support for the initiative becomes more than merely 
rhetorical. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM