null
Diana T Fritz  05/24/2007 04:41:37 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Search Results

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
SECRET

SIPDIS
TELEGRAM                                           March 30, 2003


To:       No Action Addressee                                    

Action:   Unknown                                                

From:     AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI (ABU DHABI 1512 - UNKNOWN)         

TAGS:     EAID, PREL, PGOV, PHUM                                 

Captions: None                                                   

Subject:  TFIZ01: UAE RED CRESCENT SOCIETY HAS AN AMBITIOUS      
          HUMANITARIAN AGENDA IN IRAQ                            

Ref:      None                                                   
_________________________________________________________________
S E C R E T        ABU DHABI 01512

SIPDIS
CXABU:
    ACTION: POL 
    INFO:   P/M RSO AMB DCM ECON 

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: DCM:RAALBRIGHT
DRAFTED: ECON:CCRUMPLER
CLEARED: ECON:TWILLIAMS, POL:STWILLIAMS

VZCZCADI796
OO RUEHC RUCNRAQ RUEKJCS RUMICEA RUEKJCS RUEHDE
DE RUEHAD #1512/01 0891311
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 301311Z MAR 03
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9148
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMICEA/USCINCCENT INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI PRIORITY 2970S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ABU DHABI 001512 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IRAQ TASK FORCE, ALSO NEA/ARP, NEA/RA, 
NEA/EX, NEA/IPA, AND IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL 03/30/13 
TAGS: EAID PREL PGOV PHUM IZ TC
SUBJECT:  TFIZ01: UAE RED CRESCENT SOCIETY HAS AN 
AMBITIOUS HUMANITARIAN AGENDA IN IRAQ 
 
REF: ABU DHABI 1439 
 
¶1.  (U) Classified by DCM Richard A. Alright for 
reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
¶2.  (C) Summary: Red Crescent Authority (RCA) 
Secretary General San'a Al-Kitbi confirmed to 
 
SIPDIS 
Econchief on March 29 that RCA had sent three 
delegations to Iraq during the last two months, the 
most recent of which traveled to Iraq overland from 
Jordan on March 23.  Highlighting the dangers of 
humanitarian operations in Iraq, Al-Kitbi claimed that 
-- despite clearances from the Jordanian and Iraqi Red 
Crescent Societies -- the March 23 convoy of three, 
clearly-marked vehicles came under Coalition small- 
arms fire as it traveled overland towards Baghdad. 
The group nonetheless was able to reach Baghdad (one 
driver sustained minor injuries), where RCA officials 
visited a number of hospitals and orphanages, 
delivering blankets and medicine to the Iraqi Red 
Crescent Society.  Al-Kitbi stressed that the RCA 
would not publicize the alleged incident, but was 
interested in guidance on ways to ensure better 
deconfliction and asked whether the ICRC could serve 
this purpose since the RCA is reluctant to deal 
directly with governmental/military authorities. 
 
¶3.  (C) Summary, continued:  The RCA Secretary-General 
also requested a response from the USG with regard to 
permission for the UAE Red Crescent to deliver 
humanitarian aid to needy Iraqis -- wherever they may 
be.  She noted that while the Iraqi regime would 
likely reject aid convoys from Saudi Arabian and 
Kuwaiti charities, the UAE Red Crescent believes it 
can get permission to pass through Iraqi lines.  Would 
the Coalition military authorities permit this to get 
aid to desperate Iraqi civilians?  As her final point, 
Al-Kitbi requested Post's assistance in facilitating a 
large shipment of humanitarian supplies to Umm Qasr. 
(Note:  UAE Minister of State for Foreign Affairs 
Shaykh Hamdan bin Zayid Al-Nahyan told the Ambassador 
on March 28 that getting this shipment to Iraq is a 
top priority for the UAEG.  End Note.)  Econchief 
stressed the importance of coordination for the safety 
of all involved, and noted that while Umm Qasr is 
currently closed to civilian shipping, this may change 
in the next few days.  Subsequent to this meeting, 
Econchief informed CENTCOM of the March 23 incident 
near Baghdad, and initiated coordination between the 
RCA and the Humanitarian Operations Center (HOC) in 
Kuwait to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian 
supplies to Iraq.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
RCA Workers Enter Iraq To Distribute Aid... 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) According to Red Crescent Authority Secretary- 
General San'a Al-Kitbi, during a March 23-28 visit to 
Iraq, an RCA delegation (working in partnership with 
UNICEF) visited a number of hospitals and orphanages 
to deliver emergency medical supplies and high-calorie 
milk and biscuits valued at 500,000 AED ($136,000 
USD).  (Note:  They also delivered supplies of 
blankets and medicine to the cities of Basra, Najaf, 
and Mosul through the Iraqi Red Crescent Society, 
according to press reports.  End Note.) 
 
¶5.  (C) Al-Kitbi noted that the delegation also 
distributed 20,000 loaves of bread to more than 5,000 
families in Baghdad.  The RCA hired local bakers to 
make the bread and contracted with regional flourmills 
to obtain the necessary ingredients.  RCA also 
purchased 1,000 head of sheep and goats for slaughter, 
and distributed the meat to needy Iraqi families. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
...But Experience The Dangers Of War First-Hand 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6.  (C) Al-Kitbi reported to Econchief that the three 
vehicle convoy traveling overland from Jordan came 
under alleged Coalition small arms fire nearly 60 
kilometers outside of Baghdad, although the delegation 
traveled in clearly marked Red Crescent vehicles with 
diplomatic plates.  The vehicles were armored and the 
delegation came through largely unscathed, although 
one driver was lightly wounded.  Al-Kitbi noted that 
RCA had coordinated the visit with the UAE embassies 
in Amman and Baghdad, working with the Iraqi and 
Jordanian Red Crescent Societies and the ICRC.  She 
had assumed that these entities had obtained the 
necessary clearances from the Iraqi Government and the 
U.S. military to allow safe passage for the aid 
workers.  The RCA had no intention of publicizing the 
incident, but would appreciate guidance on how to 
prevent future such incidents (here Al-Kitbi noted 
that, in general, the RCA prefers to coordinate via 
non-governmental organizations, if that is possible). 
 
¶7.  (S) Al-Kitbi noted that Iraqi authorities had 
urged the RCA to travel overland from Syria, as this 
was a "safer and shorter" route, but the RCA 
ultimately decided this was a bad idea.  Econchief 
noted recent public statements by Secretary of Defense 
Rumsfeld regarding military resupply of Iraq via 
Syria.  Al-Kitbi smiled and again reiterated that the 
RCA had ultimately decided not to do what had been so 
strongly recommended by the Iraqis. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Eager To Move More Aid To Iraq -- Fast... 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Al-Kitbi confirmed that a RCA ship hoped to 
depart soon for Umm Qasr in Iraq loaded with 1,000- 
2,000 boxes (35 kilos each) of basic foodstuffs.  Al- 
Kitbi presented a sample box containing sugar, dates, 
pasta, milk, oil, cans of beans, baby formula, and 
water to Econchief for examination.  Al-Kitbi 
requested Post's assistance in facilitating the 
shipment, but noted that the RCA could ship to 
Kuwait's Mina Al-Shuwaikh and the supplies trucked 60 
kilometers overland to Iraq if it encountered problems 
entering Umm Qasr. 
 
------------------------------ 
...And Where It Is Needed Most 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) Al-Kitbi stressed that the RCA wants to 
deliver its aid directly, not warehouse supplies for 
subsequent delivery by others.  She also noted that 
the RCA has as its mandate helping the neediest of the 
needy; to that end, the RCA would like to receive 
permission from the coalition to cross the lines and 
deliver aid in regime-controlled territory.  The RCA 
official stated that while the Iraqi authorities were 
not likely to permit Kuwaiti or Saudi charities to 
perform these activities, the UAE RCA has a long 
history of working closely and cooperatively with its 
Iraqi counterparts.  No official request has yet been 
made, Al-Kitbi observed, but a positive response from 
the Coalition side would clear the way for an approach 
to be made to Baghdad.  Econchief responded that we 
welcome the efforts of the RCA and will do all we can 
to facilitate the delivery of aid to the needy in 
Iraq.  While Umm Qasr is currently closed to civilian 
shipping, that situation could change shortly.  We 
will work closely with the HOC in Kuwait to get 
answers as soon as possible.  Econchief noted that 
continued close cooperation and sharing of information 
would be vital to a successful effort; Al-Kitbi said 
she welcomed such an exchange on an ongoing basis. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (C) The UAE Red Crescent Society is well- 
financed, enjoys good operational contacts inside 
Iraq, and is eager to play a role in getting 
humanitarian aid to the Iraqis who need it most.  Post 
is grateful for the initial positive responses we have 
received from the HOC to our various requests; 
facilitating UAE RCA operations, in our view, will 
well serve both our immediate humanitarian goals as 
well our longer-term policy objectives.  To that end, 
we will continue to work closely with the RCA and will 
report on its activities as appropriate. 
 
Wahba