This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 004850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
AIDAC 
 
FROM U.S. MISSION IN ROME 
 
AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT FOR AMBASSADOR LEBARON AND DCM BROWN 
USAID/W FOR ADMINISTRATOR NATSIOS, D/A SCHIECK, AA/DCHA 
WINTER, AA/AFR NEWMAN AND DAA/AFR BROWN, AFR/WA, DCHA/D/FFP 
LANDIS, D/OFDA MCCONNELL, AA/GLOBAL PETERSON 
STATE FOR IO A/S HOLMES, A/S PRM DEWEY, A/S AF KANSTEINER, 
AF/W, IO/EDA BEHREND/KOTOK 
USDA/FAS FOR U/S PENN AND CHAMBLISS 
USDA/FAS NAIROBI FOR KESSLER 
USMISSION GENEVA FOR AMBASSADOR MOLRY AND USAID/KYLOH 
BRUSSELS FOR AFRICA WATCHERS AND USAID/LERNER 
NSC FOR JDWORKEN AND AFRICA DIRECTORATE 
 
E.O.  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAGR AORC PREF KUNR MR WFP UN
SUBJECT:  USAID Humanitarian Attache visits Mauritania 
September 13-17, 2003 
 
REF: (A) NOUAKCHOTT 00740 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. US Mission/Rome humanitarian attache visited Mauritania 
September 13-17, and traveled in the drought affected 
regions of Bareina, Aleg and Boghe. Assessments of this area 
show a serious emergency situation. Many vulnerable groups, 
particularly children, will require continuing food and non- 
food support to meet their basic needs, for the foreseeable 
future. End summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. US Mission/Rome Humanitarian Attache visited Mauritania 
September 13-17, 2003, and traveled in the drought affected 
regions of Bareina, Aleg and Boghe with WFP emergency unit 
and partner (Oxfam) personnel. Mauritania is currently 
affected by a serious food crisis caused by recurring 
drought that is becoming endemic, and increasing rural 
destitution. Without effective intervention, this 
humanitarian crisis could result in a famine outcome. 
Following an international appeal by the Government of 
Mauritania to assist 800,000 drought-affected, WFP approved, 
on December 19, 2002, an emergency response to cover the 
immediate needs of 420,000 Mauritanians. WFP has established 
implementing partnerships with four international NGOs 
(Oxfam GB, World Vision, Lutheran World Federation and 
ACORD) to ensure efficient emergency management and 
distribution. 
 
¶3. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania (about twice the size 
of France or roughly the size of Texas and New Mexico 
combined) attained independence in 1960. While there is some 
opposition, it is essentially run by one party and continues 
to experience ethnic tensions between its minority black 
population and the dominant Maur (Arab-Berber) populace. Its 
present population is estimated at 2.91 million, with the 
bulk of the citizenry concentrated in the cities of 
Nouakchott and Nouadhibou, and along the Senegal River in 
the southern part of the country. 
 
¶4. Half the population depends on agriculture and livestock 
for their livelihood, even though many of the nomads and 
subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by recurrent 
droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. According to FAO, 
Mauritania's cultivable area is estimated at about 20 
million hectares (49 million acres), of which irrigation 
potential, given the soil resources, is 257,000 hectares. At 
present, the average cost of irrigation development varies 
between USD 2,200/hectare for small schemes to about USD 
12,500 for larger endeavors. The nation's coastal waters are 
among the richest fishing areas in the world, but 
overexploitation by foreign interests threatens this key 
source of revenue. External debt (2000 estimate) is USD 2.5 
billion. GNP is calculated at USD 370. Since 1981, the 
United States has provided to Mauritania about USD 100 
million in economic and food assistance. USAID ceased its 
operations in Mauritania in 1991. 
 
¶5. The country is chronically food deficit with cereal 
production averaging in normal years some 149,000 metric 
tons per year - about 37 percent of requirements.R BROWN, AFR/WA, 
DCHA/D/FFP 
LANDIS, D/OFDA MCCONNELL, AA/GLOBAL PETERSON 
STATE FOR IO A/S HOLMES, A/S PRM DEWEY, A/S AF KANSTEINER, 
AF/W, IO/EDA BEHREND/KOTOK 
USDA/FAS FOR U/S PENN AND CHAMBLISS 
USDA/FAS NAIROBI FOR KESSLER 
USMISSIO 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
"Snapshot" on present state of food insecurity 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. USAID's FEWS NET (September 30, 2003) Alert for 
Mauritania reports "Improved pasture, higher livestock 
prices and a fall of cereal prices have eased the burden on 
pastoralist families. Families living in most agricultural 
areas can expect the best harvest in many years. The 
positive prospects for the imminent harvest, however, only 
represent a first step toward recovery. Continuing food 
distribution to vulnerable groups and investment in recovery 
with non-food resources remain essential for reducing the 
vulnerability of Mauritanians to future shocks." 
 
¶7. Latest WFP vulnerability assessment (VAM) studies 
(September 2003) show 19 percent of the country's population 
suffers from acute malnutrition, compared to an average of 
10 percent for sub-Saharan Africa. Note: This is a 
significant deterioration relative to earlier comparable 
studies, from WFP in March 2002, and a Demographic and 
Health report (EDS 2001). End note. 
 
¶8. An additional 40 percent of children under-five suffer 
from chronic malnutrition. The under-five mortality rate is 
high at 105 per 1,000 live births and the maternal mortality 
rate is equally high at 930 per 100,000 live births. 
 
¶9. The most vulnerable populations are concentrated in the 
"Aftout Triangle," an area 500 kilometers southeast of the 
capital Nouakchott near the border with Senegal and Mali. 
Note: the disaster response effort to date has not been 
adequate in ebbing the flow of acute malnutrition. End note. 
 
¶10. Further, as per a FEWS NET release dated October 7, 
"Food conditions and prospects continue to worsen in the 
river valley and in the Aftout. To date, there has been no 
consistent program for correcting the 204,589 metric ton 
annual cereal production shortfall. The dizzying rise in the 
price of staple foodstuffs, at a time when many households 
have lost their small livestock and when they cannot count 
on ecological supplementation (gathering) has outpaced the 
survival strategies developed by rural populations; many 
households are already living under pre-famine conditions." 
 
¶11. As per FEWS NET, even if this present rainy season 
proves copious, farmers face four major obstacles: a) 
shortage of seeds - there will be country-wide cutbacks in 
the size of areas planted in rain fed crops if seed access 
does not improve; b) shortage of manpower - farming areas 
have been virtually drained of their workforce; c) erratic 
pasture production- the so-called "waltz of the animals" has 
begun which will force replanting of fields several times 
due to damage from straying animals; and d) cutbacks in 
irrigation schemes - given the acknowledged serious 
shortages of improved seeds, fertilizer, mechanical plows 
and pesticides. In sum, the situation is (and is likely to 
remain) extremely unstable. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S. Mission/Rome conclusions and recommendations 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶12. Drought is becoming the rule rather than the exception 
in Mauritania; the country has experienced drought in four 
of the past five years. It is suggested that WFP seriouslyLAS SECTION 03 
OF 04 ROME 004850 
 
AIDAC 
 
FROM U.S. MISSION IN ROME 
 
AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT FOR AMBASSADOR LEBARON AND DCM BROWN 
USAID/W FOR ADMINISTRATOR NATSIOS, D/A SCHIECK, AA/DCHA 
WINTER, AA/AFR NEWMAN AND DAA/AFR BROWN, AFR/WA, DCHA/D/FFP 
LANDIS, D/OFDA MCCONNELL, AA/GLOBAL PETERSON 
STATE FOR IO A/S HOLMES, A/S PRM DEWEY, A/S AF KANSTEINER, 
AF/W, IO/EDA BEHREND/KOTOK 
USDA/FAS FOR U/S PENN AND CHAMBLISS 
USDA/FAS NAIROBI FOR KESSLER 
USMISSION GENEVA FOR AMBASSA 
 
 
consider conversion of its ad hoc emergency (EMOP) approach 
into a longer-term protracted relief and recovery (PRRO) 
operation. Note. As a recent IDS-Save UK study on Ethiopia 
observed: "the most common proximate cause of destitution is 
catastrophic and recurrent crop failures mainly associated 
with agricultural droughts but also due to other hazards, 
such as pests." End note. 
 
¶13. WFP is presently partnered with four international non- 
governmental organizations (NGOs). While laudable, it must 
begin to focus on recruitment and strengthening of local, 
indigenous NGOs. 
 
¶14. WFP's ability to conduct emergency needs assessments 
should be strengthened. In particular, WFP should strive to 
better understand how pastoralists use food aid and make 
appropriate adjustments to its program in those areas. 
 
¶15. WFP, as one of the most active U.N. agencies (if not the 
most active) working in Mauritania, should advocate for more 
involvement from other U.N. agencies and the "line 
ministries" such as the Ministry of Health, to tackle food 
security and health issues. 
 
¶16. WFP continues to "sit-on" 25.57 million Ouguiya (the 
Mauritanian local currency), approximately USD 100,000, of 
USG PL 480 Title II Section 206 funds turned over to the WFP 
country office in 1993. The continuing inability of WFP to 
spend these funds and close out this account is an 
organizational embarrassment that calls into question WFP's 
implementation capacity in Mauritania. It is suggested that 
this money might best be spent in strengthening activities 
and capacities of local NGOs. 
 
¶17. WFP should actively encourage the government to 
undertake an immediate campaign to give top priority to 
feeding children, as endorsed by the Mauritanian Minister of 
Education at the WFP sponsored conference on the Alliance 
for Action on School Feeding in the Sahel (held in Dakar) in 
September. 
 
¶18. Warehousing of WFP commodities in GOM storage facilities 
particularly in Nouakchott, does not conform to 
international standards. 
 
¶19. It is alleged that the national trucking consortia (FNT) 
effectively blocks competition, provides unreliable service, 
and demands rates higher than those charged for comparable 
hauling services in other Sahelian countries. As per ref A, 
the Federation National des Transport's monopoly - where 
costs are the highest in the region despite low wages and 
the low price of gas - has caught the attention of the World 
Bank. It is suggested that the WFP Executive Director 
address this issue in a letter to the President of 
Mauritania. 
 
¶20. The installation of WFP's financial system WINGS and 
commodity tracking system COMPAS, including WFP direct 
financial control of its operations, is seen as a priority. 
 
¶21. It is suggested that WFP explore strengthening its 
relationship with the private sector, particularly with 
Grand Moulin de Mauritanie (GMM). WFP may wish to consider 
requesting non-fat dried milk (NFDM) from USDA (Section 416 
b) as it pursues options related to production of an 
indigenous blended food (used for weaning) - along the lines 
of its discussions in Senegal related to "Chocosen."STRATOR NATSIOS, D/A 
SCHIECK, AA/DCHA 
WINTER, AA/AFR NEWMAN AND DAA/AFR BROWN, AFR/WA, DCHA/D/FFP 
LANDIS, D/OFDA MCCONNELL, AA/GLOBAL PETERSON 
STATE FOR IO A/S HOLMES, A/S PRM DEWEY, A/S AF KANSTEINER, 
AF/W, IO/EDA BEHREND/KOTOK 
USDA/ 
 
 
¶22. WFP's VAM unit is advised to strengthen its linkages 
with FEWS, Oxfam, and FAO's GIEWS - in terms of better 
documentation of drought and destitution trends. 
 
¶23. WFP needs to develop a better partnership with FAO on 
drought response. US Mission/Rome will work with FAO 
Headquarters to strengthen its emergency outreach in 
Mauritania. FAO Mauritania needs to focus its attention on a 
more complete and comprehensive emergency needs assessment 
for seeds and on developing a common methodology for 
emergency seeds interventions with its government and NGO 
partners. 
 
¶24. WFP needs to tighten up its local cost calculation 
matrices while increasing its dialogue with NGO partners 
related to the delivery of WFP relief supplies. Note. Donors 
in general should prioritize increasing resource flows to 
local NGOs. End note. 
 
¶25. It is suggested that, if appropriate, the U.S. explore a 
Title I bilateral assistance program, with local currencies 
generated for use in drought response efforts and other 
development projects. 
 
¶26. We also underline the importance, for both the UN and 
international donors, of giving equal priority to food and 
non-food needs in Mauritania to ensure the most complete 
emergency response possible.  Hall 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME04850 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED