This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL LI NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIAN PRESIDENCY STATEMENT ON TAYLOR 
 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1576 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶B. LAGOS 1928 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶C. FBIS AFP20030918000148 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTRANET OR INTERNET. 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) According to press reports, the Nigerian 
Presidential Spokesman, Mrs. Remi Oyo, told the press Tuesday 
evening September 26 that the GON was displeased with Charles 
Taylor.  She is quoted as saying, "The GON has made it clear 
to Mr. Taylor that it will not tolerate any breach of these 
conditions and others which forbid him from engaging in 
active communications with anyone engaged in political, 
illegal or government activities."  Also, "The GON wishes to 
state that the conditions given, and accepted by Mr. Taylor, 
for his asylum in Nigeria, clearly forbid any interference in 
the ongoing political process aimed at ending the prolonged 
crisis in Liberia and returning the country to peace and 
normalcy."  She was responding to a question on allegations 
by UNSYG Special Envoy Klein that Taylor was making phone 
calls to Liberian officials. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Mrs. Oyo's quoted statement is in line with GON 
public policy that Taylor must be kept under control, and 
with the general Nigerian antipathy for Taylor (Refs A and 
B).  But our contacts at the Foreign Ministry and Presidency 
have been unable to confirm that the Presidency made such a 
statement, and Mrs. Oyo has been backpedaling in public since 
(Ref C to the BBC) from the idea that the GON was confirming 
Klein's accusations. 
MEECE