This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000604 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/27/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TF1Z01:  SANAA EAC MARCH 27 
 
REF: SANAA 00602 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meeting on March 27 to 
assess Embassy posture in light of recent threat information 
(ref) and the possibility of uncontrolled demonstrations. 
Embassy went to StandFast posture on March 27 at the open of 
business as a precaution.  The ROYG sponsored a peaceful 
anti-war demonstration on March 27 without incident.  Key 
offices and personnel represented at the meeting included: 
AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, ORCA, OMC, SOC 
YEMEN, FPD and RMO.  End Summary 
 
-------------------------------- 
Threat Information; 
Peaceful Demonstration Held 3/27 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  ORCA briefed EAC on threat information (ref).  The 
government held a peaceful anti-war demonstration on 3/27 at 
1000 in the center of Sanaa.  It began at Tahrir Square and 
moved to the viewing stands at Old Airport Road 
(approximately 3 miles from Embassy).  Post was informed of 
the demonstration by MOI and PSO on 3/26 and Yemeni 
television announced it last evening.  Post sent a warden 
message early 3/27 to alert Americans to the demonstration 
and advise them to remain at home. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Numbers were estimated at approximately 6000 
demonstrators, and it ended peacefully by 1230.  Yemeni 
religious figures (ulema) led the procession -- a conscious 
effort, according to the PSO, to pre-empt any effort to stage 
unauthorized demonstrations following Friday prayers on 3/28. 
 
 
¶4.  (C)  ROYG authorities told Post no/no requests for 
authorized demonstrations were received for 3/28. 
 
-------------------------------- 
StandFast;  Authorized Departure 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Post went on StandFast posture March 27 at the 
opening of business and will revert to MoveSafe at close of 
business March 28 unless circumstances warrant continuing 
StandFast.  EAC discussed authorized departure. 
HULL