This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE, IIP/G/WHA 
DIPASQUALE, EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR AGASH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO ETRD PGOV PARM HO
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON WTO AND ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT, OCTOBER 
1, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El Heraldo" on 
10/1 entitled "The U.S. and Its Stick and Carrot Policy".  "The 
continuous implementation of the traditional stick and carrot 
policy by the U.S. in its external affairs has recently been 
evidenced by two events: the exoneration from penalties for four 
poor countries that signed agreements with Washington to 
guarantee the impunity of Americans responsible for crimes 
against humanity and the threats against Guatemala and Costa Rica 
for being members of the now-powerful G-22, the group of 
countries that are fighting in the WTO to eliminate agricultural 
subsidies." 
 
"In regard to the boycott of the ICC, the White House had 
threatened to withhold military aid to 35 countries if they 
didn't sign an Article 98 agreement.  Four of those countries: 
Honduras, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo and 
Georgia gave in, and this week Washington informed them that they 
had achieved their reward, their carrot." 
 
"On the other hand, Guatemala and Costa Rica are being threatened 
with the Washington stick for having the nerve to be part of the 
G-22, a group that seeks more equitable trade among poor and rich 
countries.  Obviously, the failure of the Cancun meeting has 
infuriated the U.S. and other rich countries that encountered a 
unified group of countries that aren't willing to be manipulated 
anymore.  We hope that both countries remain with the G-22 
because, as it was demonstrated in Cancun, the only option for 
the victims of agricultural subsidies is to remain united." 
 
"We wonder how come Honduras, whose peasants would be severely 
affected competing with subsidized products from rich countries, 
is not a member of the G-22? We hope it's not because of the 
traditional preventive fear of our governmental authorities." 
 
"In one way or another, the traditional stick and carrot policy 
is still yielding positive results, even though there is a 
worldwide cry against the unfairness of globalization." 
 
Palmer