This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002291 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
EUR/UBI, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL GT NL OAS
SUBJECT: DUTCH WILL CONTRIBUTE TO GUATEMALA OAS OBSERVER 
MISSION 
 
REF: STATE 259220 
 
¶1.     (SBU) The Dutch plan to contribute approximately USD 
100,000 to the OAS Electoral Observer Mission in Guatemala, 
confirming the information in ref A.  On September 11, Lucie 
de Zwaan of the MFA Western Hemisphere Division informed 
EconOff of the intended contribution, but asked that the USG 
not/not disseminate this information before the Netherlands 
has a chance to formally notify the OAS directly, which it 
will do in the next few days.  The Dutch also expect to 
participate in some form in the European election observers 
mission, although the Ministry had no further details on this. 
 
¶2.     (U) De Zwaan said Dutch Minister for Development 
Cooperation Agnes Van Ardenne alluded to possible Dutch 
financial support for the election observer mission during 
her September 10 visit to Guatemala City.  During her trip, 
Van Ardenne met the Guatemalan Foreign Minister, spoke to the 
"Groupo Dialogo," and conferred with members of the 
international donors group.  She also surveyed the mass 
graves project and spoke with a group identified as the 
"National Forests Council." 
 
¶3.     (U) A coalition of Dutch NGOs interested in Guatemala 
recently met with Piet de Klerk, the new director of the 
MFA's Human Rights Division.  They urged him to ask the UN to 
release its report on Guatemala and underlined the need to 
support the country's democratic process. 
SOBEL