This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND 
IIP/T/ES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO ETRD HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON WTO, SEPTEMBER 19, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Op-ed by Roger Marin Neda in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily 
"El Heraldo" on 9/19 entitled "Running after a mirage".  "There 
were no great expectations before the failed WTO meeting in 
Cancun, although we are aware that free trade is fundamental for 
economic growth and poverty reduction." 
 
"For some, the failure of the Cancun meeting began in 1996 when 
the EU and Japan requested the inclusion of several new issues in 
the original WTO agreement: policies to promote competitiveness, 
transparency in government purchases, and deregulation of foreign 
investment and trade.  Developing countries saw more obligations 
without more rights, more costs than benefits, increased risks of 
legal penalties, and restrictions for their labor and 
environmental policies." 
 
"The U.S. presented a much better proposal: the progressive 
elimination of tariffs on manufactures until 2015, and a 76% 
reduction of tariffs on agricultural goods for the next five 
years. It was a sound proposal, but it didn't address the issue 
of agricultural and cotton subsidies.  A New York Times editorial 
stated that, `businesses, workers and taxpayers should be 
angered, because this administration is far more enthusiastic to 
support the most indefensible protectionism than protecting the 
national interests, by promoting growth through greater trade'. 
Undoubtedly, the U.S. was more flexible and open, and I believe 
their proposals would have been viable if the demands from Japan 
and the EU didn't place such heavy burden on the developing 
countries." 
 
 
"One of the biggest surprises of the Cancun meeting was the G-21, 
where half of the global population and two-thirds of the 
agricultural producers live.  The G-21 demonstrated its unity, 
strength and boldness, even though countries like China, Brazil, 
India and South Africa have very different economies and cultural 
values, and it's uncertain that they will share a medium or long- 
term common position, as they did in Cancun." 
 
"It will be unrealistic for developing countries to have long- 
term expectations in the G-21.  It'll be like going after an 
illusion, a mirage.  It's like expecting that the equality of 
global trade on agricultural goods will bring immediate benefits 
to the producers." 
 
Palmer