This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001024 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, PM (AMB LINO AND T. MITCHELL); OSD FOR 
ISA, ISP AND LEGAL; JCS FOR J3, J5 AND LEGAL (M. BOOCK); 
EUCOM FOR J3, J4, J5, POLAD AND LEGAL; CENTCOM FOR J3, J5 
AND POLAD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU
SUBJECT: IRAQ: GOT PROVIDES DIP NOTE PUTTING SITE PREP MOU 
INTO EFFECT 
 
 
REF: A) ANKARA 1005 B) STATE 36584 C)ANKARA 995 
 
 
(u) Classified by Acting Deputy Chief of Mission Scott 
Marciel.  Reasons:  1.5 (B and D) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Late afternoon February 10, the MFA informed the 
Embassy via diplomatic note that the GOT had fulfilled all of 
the internal procedures necessary for the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) for Site Preparations that was signed 
late February 8 (ref a) to enter into force.  Paragraph 2 
contains the text of the MFA's diplomatic note.  Para 3 
contains the text of the diplomatic note the Embassy 
delivered to the MFA late February 8 following the signature 
of the MOU as authorized by the Department (ref b). 
 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text of the MFA's diplomatic note (number 
2003/ALGY/56737): 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to Article VII of the 
"Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Government of 
the Republic of Turkey and the Government of the United 
States of America, on the Establishment and Implementation of 
Basic Policy, Principles, Procedures and to Determine the 
Status of the Site Preparation Personnel of the United States 
of America in Turkey for the Purposes of Site Preparation 
Activities," signed in Ankara on February 8, 2003, has the 
honor to inform the Embassy of the fulfillment of all 
internal procedures necessary for the aforesaid MOU's entry 
into force. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
End text. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Below is the text of the diplomatic note (number 249) 
the Embassy sent the MFA on February 8: 
 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Republic of Turkey and has the honor to inform the Ministry 
that the Government of the United States of America has 
completed all of its internal procedures necessary for entry 
into force of the Memorandum of Understanding between the 
Government of the United States of America and the Government 
of the Republic of Turkey on the Establishment and 
Implementation of Basic Policy, Principles, Procedures and to 
Determine the Status of the Site Preparation Personnel of the 
United States of America in Turkey for the Purposes of Site 
Preparation Activities, signed in Ankara on February 8, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
 
End text. 
PEARSON