This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ANKARA 002101 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR PRM/ANE, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, IO AND SA/PAB, NSC FOR 
DWORKEN, MANN, KHALILZAD, QUANRUD, AND BRYZA 
DEPT PASS USAID FOR NATSIOS, DCHA/OFDA FOR GARVELINK, 
MCCONNELL, MARX, AND FARNSWORTH, ANE/AA FOR CHAMBERLAIN, 
USAID/A, DCHA/AA, DCHA/RMT, DCHA/OFDA, DCHA/FFP, DCHA/OTI, 
DCHA/DG, ANE/AA AND USAID/AA 
ROME FOR FODOG, GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH 
EUCOM FOR J3, J5 AND POLAD 
CENTCOM FOR J3, J5 AND POLAD 
PACOM FOR POLAD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AA EAID EFIN IZ MOPS PHUM PREF PREL TU
SUBJECT: NGO-IO COORDINATION MEETINGS IN ANKARA 
 
 
-------- 
Summary 
-------- 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) DART Field Office/North hosted a 22 March NGO/IO 
coordination meeting in Ankara to discuss the NGO 
registration process with the Turkish government, memorandums 
of understanding for working in or transiting Turkey, and 
options for entering northern Iraq through other countries. 
Sixteen international and non-governmental organizations 
expecting to be involved in the humanitarian response in 
Turkey or northern Iraq were represented.  Additionally, two 
representatives of the U.S. military attended the meeting to 
brief the humanitarian community on the military,s proposed 
humanitarian activities and how it might cooperate with 
humanitarian workers inside Iraq.  UN OCHA agreed to host 
future coordination meetings. 
 
 
¶2. (U) UN OCHA hosted a subsequent NGO/IO coordination 
meeting on 25 March.  UNHCR, IOM, UNICEF and WFP briefed the 
representatives of eight NGOs, IFRC and the American Red 
Cross on their current and proposed humanitarian activities 
in Turkey and northern Iraq.  Following the briefings, NGOs 
gave updates on their registration with the Turkish 
government and presented their proposed activities in Turkey 
and northern Iraq.  DART Field Office/North will continue to 
attend and monitor these meetings while in Turkey. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
NGOs Registering with the Turkish Government 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) At present, the registration process and the 
timeframe for completing registration with the MFA remain 
unclear.  In commenting on this process, UN OCHA declared it 
quote a work in progress unquote.  The UN believed that the 
MFA would provide answers to NGO questions about registration 
the week of 24 March.  On 10 March IRC submitted its request 
to both work in Turkey and transit through to northern Iraq, 
and they hoped to receive an official response from the MFA 
by the end of March (Comment: There has been no response from 
MFA on either issue.  End comment).  A number of NGOs asked 
if their concerns and their need to move forward could 
somehow be relayed to the MFA. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) While registration is in process, there remain a 
number of outstanding issues for NGOs.  First, it is unclear 
what bureaucratic actions will be necessary for each transit 
or shipment of commodities through Turkey.  Second, it is 
also unclear for how long a transit permit will be valid. 
Some NGOs had the impression that the permit would be valid 
for only one transit, but UN OCHA stated that the MFA was 
looking at granting them for quote a window of time unquote. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The UN Joint Logistics Center representative stated 
that UNJLC was evaluating the Syrian corridor for supplying 
northern Iraq.  He reported that WFP and UNICEF were also 
looking at the viability of this option.  International 
Medical Corps representatives contacted the Syrian 
authorities but were informed that international NGOs were 
not being registered at this time.  In response, the UN 
representatives said that this could be old information, and 
that NGOs should inquire again.  The UN stated that if the 
clearances through Syria were a problem, NGOs could possibly 
use the UN umbrella. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
Working in Turkey and northern Iraq 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (U) UNHCR,s deputy representative for Turkey noted that 
the UN would be taking part in meetings at the Turkish 
government,s Crisis Coordination Center in Diyarbakir 
beginning the week of 24 March.  Daily meetings are scheduled 
to deal with humanitarian issues in Turkey, including 
refugees and border activities. 
 
 
¶7. (U) UNHCR noted that there was now a new Crisis Management 
structure that NGOs might use for registration, and that it 
may prove faster than normal channels for moving registration 
along.  UNHCR believes there is good will on the part of the 
Turkish government and that the process may become more 
efficient. 
 
 
¶8. (U) Several NGOs (the International Rescue Committee 
(IRC), Northwest Medical Team International, World Relief - 
through their local partner, Global Source Network - and 
CARE) expressed an interest in working with UNHCR in Turkey 
if the need arises.  Save the Children expressed interest in 
community services, and Oxfam is looking at possible programs 
along the Turkish-Iraqi border and over the border if UNHCR 
works there.  While pleased with the interest, UNHCR informed 
the NGOs that travel to the southeast region of Turkey was 
restrictive, and people should not attempt to visit the 
region without proper clearances from the MFA. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Most of the NGOs present at the meetings said they 
will work in northern Iraq.  They are CARE, SCF, IRC, the 
International Medical Corps (IMC) and Shelter for Life 
(formerly Shelter Now).  CARE, SCF, IRC and IMC have all 
submitted proposals to USAID/OFDA for cooperative agreements 
to work in Iraq. 
 
 
-------------- 
U.S. Military 
-------------- 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) At the 22 March meeting, representatives from the 
U.S. military spoke about the military,s civil affairs 
program and the possibilities for cooperating with 
humanitarian workers once their organizations were inside 
northern Iraq.  Sharing security and assessment information 
and logistical support, if available, were mentioned.  A 
lively discussion followed the presentation, centering on the 
diverse concerns and needs that the military and humanitarian 
agencies have to reach their respective goals and objectives. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Working in Turkey, continued 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) In the second coordination meeting in three days, 
UNHCR,s representative for Turkey informed the NGOs that 
planning for refugees and asylum seekers was ongoing with the 
Turkish government and the Turkish Red Crescent Society 
(Kizilay).  The representative stated that pre-positioning 
supplies had been difficult, and that UNHCR was still seeking 
clarification from the Turkish government on camp sites 
within Turkey, border issues and possible activities inside 
northern Iraq. 
 
 
¶12. (SBU) UNHCR plans to pre-position commodities for up to 
136,000 refugees.  They currently have tents and other 
non-food items for 60,000-70,000 persons.  UNHCR is also 
planning for 56,000 potential refugees or asylum seekers who 
will arrive at the Turkish-Iraqi border but not be admitted 
to Turkey. 
 
 
¶13. (U) Agreements have been made with partner UN agencies to 
provide services to UNHCR in Turkey.  IOM will provide 
transport, WFP will provide food and UNICEF will provide 
services in health, nutrition and mine awareness.  UNHCR will 
provide protection and community services.  The 
representative asked the NGOs to consider what services they 
might provide to UNHCR in Turkey if the need arises. 
 
 
¶14. (SBU) WFP has pre-positioned 30,000 metric tons of dry 
food stocks in two warehouses in Turkey that, according to 
UNHCR, will provide them with four weeks of rations.  WFP 
also has 6,200 metric tons of wheat flour, 3,600 metric tons 
of vegetable oil and 3,000 metric tons of biscuits that they 
are targeting for Iraq. 
 
 
¶15. (U) IOM is responsible for caring for third-country 
nationals in Turkey, although few are expected.  IOM also 
will provide transport for refugees and medical services. 
They have local medical staff but would require additional 
medical support if a large influx of refugees was to occur. 
 
 
-------------- 
Northern Iraq 
-------------- 
 
 
¶16. (U) The Northern Iraq Field Representative for UNICEF and 
the WFP Logistics Officer stationed in Ankara spoke about the 
situation in northern Iraq.  WFP and UNICEF have functioning 
offices in northern Iraq, and they are in daily contact with 
local staff members in Dohuk, Erbil and Sulaimaniyah. 
Expatriate staff were evacuated before the start of the war. 
WFP also has offices in Mosul and Kirkuk, but there has been 
no contact since the war began. 
¶17. (SBU) WFP has conducted assessments in northern Iraq, and 
they are prepared to move 100,000 metric tons of food over 
the border if it is needed.  Transport has been engaged for 
this amount.  The Northern Iraq Field Representative for 
UNICEF stated that there had been two years of good rain in 
the region and that good harvest, complimenting the WFP food 
stocks, will lessen food needs.  The Field Representative 
went on to say, however, that a major influx of displaced 
persons would strain this situation.  In preparing for a 
possible influx of IDPs, UNICEF has moved some supplies away 
the frontline.  Eighteen camp sites have been set up and, if 
there is a need, public buildings have been identified and 
could be made available. 
 
 
¶18. (SBU) The UNICEF Field Representative informed the NGOs 
and IOs present that following the onset of the war as many 
as 600,000 people had moved in the Kurdish-controlled region 
of Iraq.  People moved from cities to villages and into the 
mountains, fearing that the Iraqi forces might shell the 
cities.  After 48 hours, the vast majority of these people 
returned to their homes.  The Field Representative stated 
that there had been no movements toward the Turkish and 
Iranian borders. 
 
 
¶19. (SBU) UNICEF reports that there are now 250,000 to 
280,000 IDPs in the Kurdish-controlled region.  Local 
authorities are trying to persuade people to return to their 
homes.  They worry that if the frontline does open and there 
is a large influx of people, empty homes could be occupied by 
IDPs. 
 
 
¶20. (U) The UNICEF Field Representative noted that there are 
potential problems in northern Iraq, as well as some 
strengths in the communities.  There is a shortage of fuel 
and it is three to four times its normal price.  There are 
needs in shelter and medicine, particularly in pediatrics and 
maternal care.  Budgets are tight, and there is a need for 
training in the health sector as many qualified people have 
either left the region or not had access to up-to-date 
educational opportunities.  Strengths cited are good local 
capacity (e.g., organization, management and skill levels) 
and communications. 
 
 
¶21. (U) UN OCHA will host another NGO/IO coordination meeting 
on 2 April at UN House in Ankara. 
 
 
PEARSON