This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 002454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2013 
TAGS: PHUM CA UNHRC
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA: CANADA TAKING LONG-TERM VIEW 
 
REF: STATE 240681 
 
Classified By: Pol MC Brian Flora for reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Post delivered points contained reftel on August 26 to 
Adrian Norfolk, Acting Director of DFAIT's Human Rights, 
Humanitarian Affairs and International Women's Equality 
Division. Norfolk said that Canada takes a long-term view 
towards the human rights situation in China. While Canada 
does not believe the human rights situation in China is good, 
Norfolk said, the situation is at least better now than it 
was 20 years ago. Canada is hopeful this long-term trend will 
continue, Norfolk said. 
 
¶2. (C) Planning is underway in Norfolk's division for two 
upcoming human rights dialogues with Chinese officials, a 
bilateral meeting in Ottawa in October and a trilateral 
meeting with China and Norway in December. Norfolk said that 
Canada and China have held bilateral meetings focusing on 
human rights each year since 1997. Norfolk feels these 
dialogues have been productive and that Chinese officials 
have reacted well to Canadian concerns. He noted, 
however,that unlike the U.S.,the Canadians have not set any 
real benchmarks by which to measure China's progress on human 
rights. 
 
¶3. (C) With respect to a China resolution at next spring's 
CHR session, Norfolk indicated it is too early to say whether 
Canada would sponsor or co-sponsor. He noted that such 
country-specific resolutions are an extremely sensitive 
matter for Canada. Norfolk said that if such a resolution is 
brought forward, Canada would oppose a no-action motion by 
the Chinese, although he noted that China would likely 
prevail on such a motion. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
KELLY