This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

050834Z Nov 03UNCLAS ANKARA 006891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEASTERN PRESS SUMMARY - NOV. 4, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  THIS CABLE IS FROM CONSULATE ADANA.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy of the 
reports summarized here. 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  Ekspres / In Daglioglu, Sakirpasa and Hurriyet districts, 
Adana province, people protested in support of Abdullah 
Ocalan.  Police tried to control the crowd but the windows of 
a police car were broken during the protest. 
 
 
¶3.  Turkiye / Mersin health workers protested against the 
Health Ministry's 2004 budget.  According to Mersin Health 
Union Head Abbas Koluacik, the money allocated for health is 
not enough. 
 
 
¶4.  Radikal, Cumhuriyet / The Democratic People's Party 
(DEHAP) Women's branch organized an activity for the children 
called "Children's Peace Walls."  When children were observed 
writing in Kurdish and praising Abdullah Ocalan on the wall, 
police warned them that only peace symbols could be painted 
and anything else must be removed. 
 
 
¶5. Evrensel / In Cizre, Sirnak province police detained DEHAP 
members Bahattin Yagarcik, Huseyin Avsar, Suleyman Tosun, 
Sadik Fidan, and one unidentified person for their 
involvement in protests during the meeting ceremony their 
DEHAP party head. 
EDELMAN