This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 005961 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR PM/RSAT A. BONFANTE; DSCA FOR J. TAYLOR; JCS FOR 
CDR BRASWELL; OSD FOR COPSON-NIECKO 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: MFA DIPNOTE ON SEEBRIG 
 
 ¶1.  On September 18, 2003, the Embassy received a diplomatic 
note from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (see para 2 for 
complete text) on the South Eastern European Brigade 
(SEEBRIG).  Embassy faxed copy of the diplomatic note to 
OSD's Maria Copson-Niecko in Istanbul. 
 
 
¶2.  Begin text of MFA note No. UNGY-II No: 7938: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and has the honor to refer to the proposed 
temporary transfer of USG-provided communications information 
system equipment to the Turkish company, Aselsan, which, 
pursuant to a contract between the Turkish Ministry of 
Defense and Aselsan, will integrate the equipment into 
vehicles donated by the Government of Turkey for use by the 
South Eastern European Brigade (SEEBRIG).  The Government of 
Turkey understands that in keeping with United States laws 
and regulations, the United States Government may consider 
consenting to this temporary transfer of such equipment only 
upon first being furnished with assurances from the 
Government of Turkey that it will not permit Aselsan to 
retransfer the defense articles or any component thereof 
(including technical information), by sale, lease, release, 
assignment loan conveyance or any other means to any 
government (with the exception of the Government of Romania, 
acting as the next SEEBRIG headquarters host nation upon the 
equipment's return), entity, international organization, or 
person not an officer, employee, or agent of Aselsan or to 
use the defense articles, or any component thereof (including 
technical information), for any purpose other than for 
integration into vehicles donated by the Government of Turkey 
for use by SEEBRIG, pursuant to the agreement between Aselsan 
and the Government of Turkey without first obtaining the 
written consent of the United States Government.  In 
accordance with the foregoing, the Government of Turkey 
hereby gives its assurances that, unless the written consent 
of the United States Government is first obtained: 
 
 
i) it will not permit Aselsan to retransfer this 
communications information system equipment, or any component 
thereof (including technical information), by sale, lease, 
release, assignment, loan, conveyance or any other means to 
any government (with the exception of the Government of 
Romania upon the equipment's return to the SEEBRIG 
headquarters host nation), entity, international organization 
or person not an officer, employee or agent of Aselsan; 
 
 
ii) it will not permit Aselsan the use of this communications 
information system equipment, or any component thereof 
(including technical information), for any purpose other than 
for integration into vehicles donated by the Government of 
Turkey for use by SEEBRIG, pursuant to the agreement between 
Aselsan and the Government of Turkey, and, 
 
 
iii) the Government of Turkey agrees to retain ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring that any technical information 
retained by Aselsan after all equipment furnished is returned 
to the Government of Romania remains within the territorial 
boundaries of Turkey and under the legal jurisdiction of the 
Government of Turkey. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
Ankara, 15 September, 2003. 
 
 
End of text. 
EDELMAN