This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 001555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV, G/TIP, and DRL 
 
E.O. 12958:  NA 
TAGS: PHUM KCRM KWMN PGOV SOCI VM TIP
SUBJECT:  GVN Complains TIP Report Shorts Its Efforts 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Assistant Foreign Minister Nguyen Duc Hung 
complained to DCM during a June 20 meeting at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs (MFA) that Vietnam's placement on Tier II 
and in particular the evaluation of Vietnam's law 
enforcement efforts against Trafficking in Persons do not 
"truly reflect reality."  He said that GVN law enforcement 
agencies had asked MFA to convey their displeasure with the 
report and their view that the trafficking situation is much 
better than depicted.  AFM Hung pointed out that the GVN 
severely punishes traffickers.  He also took issue with the 
TIP report's mention that rehabilitation centers have been 
criticized for "reeducation" and limiting victims' freedom 
of movement.  AFM Hung also raised the GVN working group 
responsible for coordinating efforts against TIP as an 
example of the SRV's seriousness in addressing the issue. 
 
¶2.  (U)  DCM and poloff responded that some GVN law 
enforcement officials contacted about TIP have painted a 
much brighter picture than their colleagues in other 
ministries and officials from government-sponsored mass 
organizations such as the Women's Union.  Also law 
enforcement officials in Hanoi have been more forthright 
about TIP than some of their provincial counterparts.  DCM 
and poloff stated that Mission officers have visited the 
some of the rehabilitation facilities and believe that the 
report is accurate.  Poloff noted that while the GVN does 
have a coordinating committee for TIP, the GVN itself has 
found the mechanism ineffective and is taking steps to 
improve it. 
BURGHARDT