This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000800 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/CIP TFINTON 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR KSHAGRIN AND JMCHALE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ETRD
SUBJECT: 1377 REVIEW: CANADA CONSIDERING RESPONSE TO ISP 
APPLICATION 
 
REF: STATE 50683 
 
¶1. Econoff contacted CRTC Executive Director for 
Telecommunications Shirley Soehn to solicit information on 
how Canada planned to address the issues raised Reftel. 
Soehn noted that the CRTC received an Application from the 
Canadian Association of Internet Providers (CAIP) regarding 
the "anti-competitive provision of high-speed access and 
retail Internet services, including 'lite' service, by 
incumbent cable and telephone carriers."  Soehn stated that 
ISP's already have non-discriminatory access to cable 
infrastructure at wholesale rates set by the CRTC and that it 
was not a requirement that CRTC address this issue of access 
to "lite" Internet service.  However, the CRTC is currently 
reviewing the application and follow-on submissions and would 
be making a recommendation to the CRTC Commissioner.  Soehn 
did not provide a time-frame for a conclusion of the 
proceedings on CAIP's application.  Details on the various 
submissions can be found on the CRTC web site at: 
www.crtc.gc.ca/PartVII/end/2002/8622/c51-03.h tm. 
 
¶2. Soehn commented that she was surprised that this issue had 
been raised in the context of USTR's annual 1377 review given 
that "Canadian regulations go well beyond those in the U.S." 
in providing ISP's with access to incumbent's high speed 
Internet networks. 
KELLY