This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
FEBRUARY 19, 2003 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for February 19, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  THIRTY-FIVE PEOPLE ARRESTED IN ADANA 
(Milli Gazete/Sabah/Bolge)   The Adana security 
Directorate arrested 35 people who were 
identified to be involved in various actions such 
as demonstrations, blocking roads, and tossing 
Molotov cocktails, sticks and stones against 
security forces.  After their interrogation it 
was stated that their actions aimed at improving 
terrorist leader Ocalan`s prison conditions and 
ending his isolation. Security officials stated 
that these individuals were preparing to take 
actions against public institutions. 
 
 
¶3.  VILLAGE GUARDS REFUSE TO BE CONTRACT SOLDIERS 
(Milli Gazete)   The temporary village guards 
working in Hakkari said they did not want to be 
American contract soldiers.  Leader of Jirki Clan 
Mehmet Adiyeman said that three thousand members 
of the clan were village guards, and in case of 
war against Iraq they will be ready to fight 
along with the Turkish Army.  Adiyeman said they 
have received information that America would like 
to see village guards on their side in a possible 
war against Iraq.  He said they did not want 
America's money to become contract soldiers. 
 
 
¶4.  TURKISH RED CRESCENT PREPARES FOR POSSIBLE 
WAR 
(Milli Gazete/Turkiye)   Kizilay is preparing for 
immigrants coming to Turkey because of a possible 
war against Iraq.  Kizilay is carrying equipment 
from warehouses in Ankara, Elazig and Erzurum to 
Sirnak where they will establish the main 
warehouse.  Milli Gazete reports that a group of 
60 people from Turkish Red Crescent will go to 
northern Iraq to make preliminary preparation for 
tents to be set up for refugees.  The Health 
Ministry held a meeting with provincial health 
directorates in southeastern Turkey yesterday to 
prepare for the refugees.  The Health Ministry is 
aiming at providing health services to one 
hundred thousand people. 
 
 
¶5.  EIGHTEEN ARRESTED IN PROTEST OF ISOLATION 
(Evrensel)   Eighteen people were arrested in 
Hakkari, Van and Mersin for participating in 
demonstrations in favor of PKK/KADEK leader 
Abdullah Ocalan.  The Labor, Peace and Democracy 
Bloc protested in Mersin against war and Ocalan`s 
isolation; police intervened.  Mersin DEHAP 
provincial chairman Muzaffer Akad was among the 
18 people who were beaten and later arrested. 
 
 
¶6.  DEHAP SAYS "NO TO WAR" 
(Bolge)   Adana DEHAP provincial chairman Mehmet 
Cancelik stated in his speech that Turkey is 
being dragged into war regardless of the 
increasing demand for peace.  America's 
intervening will mean death to the people in the 
Middle East. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶7.  THE PORT THAT AMERICA WANTS 
(Hurriyet)   American Ships carrying soldiers and 
equipment have been near Turkish territorial 
waters for days.  If the Turkish National 
Assembly approves, these ships will first dock at 
Iskenderun port.  The port is waiting for the 
fifty million dollar investment for 
modernization.  The telephone company has 
connected special telephone lines to the port, 
and cranes have removed scrap equipment.  Two 
warehouses in the port have been rented to 
Americans.  Hurriyet reports that American 
vessels were as close as twelve miles to 
Iskenderun before the Sacrifice Holiday.  On 
Monday these vessels withdrew to a point between 
Syria and North Cyprus. 
 
 
¶8.  BOMB-LOADED FLIGHTS ON INCIRLIK AIR BASE 
(Tercuman/Milli Gazete)   The activity continued 
at Incirlik airbase yesterday with F-15 and F-16 
jets loaded with bombs flying to northern Iraq. 
Tercuman reports that some of the F-16 jets 
returned with bombs, yet some came back without 
bombs.  The intensity continued on the ground 
with the repair and maintenance of the runway. 
HOLTZ