This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 004680

SIPDIS

STATE FOR NEA/FO, NEA/ARP

E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/13/2013
TAGS: PREL SA KU
SUBJECT: (C) GOK SEES STRONG SAUDI COMMITMENT AGAINST
TERRORISM

Classified By: AMB. RICHARD H. JONES; REASON 1.5 (B,D)

¶1. (C) SUMMARY: The GOK assesses that key Saudi leaders
Prince Sultan and Prince Nayif have become strongly committed
against terrorism since the May 12 Riyadh attacks. END
SUMMARY.

¶2. (C) NEA PDAS Larocco called on Shaykh Sabah al-Khalid
al-Hamad al-Sabah, Chairman of Kuwait's National Security
Bureau, October 13, during a brief visit to Kuwait. This
message reports what Shaykh Sabah al-Khalid (protect
throughout) had to say about Saudi Arabia (other topics
septels).

¶3. (C) Sabah al-Khalid said that since the May 12 Riyadh
attacks, the Saudi leadership -- i.e. senior members of the
ruling family -- had finally concluded that terrorism
represented a direct threat to the family. Neither Defense
Minister Prince Sultan nor Interior Minister Prince Nayif
had, until then. Both had accommodated extremists, in order
to keep peace; they had never admitted that their own ranks
contained extremists in key positions. Now they do admit it,
and have taken decisive action. It is a big job, and the
Saudi leaders understand they will suffer additional
casualties, but the Kuwaiti leadership believes the Saudis
will press on systematically, purging the ranks of the
military, National Guard and Ministry of Interior, while
working to provide direct guidance to imams for their Friday
sermons.

¶4. (U) Ambassador Larocco was the source of this message,
but did not have time to clear the cable itself.

¶5. (U) Baghdad minimize considered.
JONES