This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

190709Z Sep 03UNCLAS ABUJA 001629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PINR NI
SUBJECT: LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORM, PART 2 
 
 
REF: ABUJA 1150 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTRANET OR INTERNET. 
 
 
¶1. (U) The Technical Review Committee on Local Government 
Reform has resumed work this week after receiving a new 
chairman, Malam Liman Ciroma, former Secretary to the 
Government of the Federation (SGF).  The Committee's work had 
stalled two weeks ago after the death of the Etsu Nupe, a 
traditional ruler from Niger State who was the chairman. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ciroma's selection was a mild surprise.  His brother 
is the Ciroman Fika (Emir of Fike in Yobe State).  Ciroma is 
next in line for that traditional title of Ciroman Fika (Emir 
of Fike in Yobe State) currently held by his brother, but has 
been retired for many years.  Most observers expected a 
different traditional ruler to become chairman, either the 
Emir of Zaria (Kaduna State) or the Tor-Tiv (Benue State). 
Ciroma was SGF during Obasanjo's military administration in 
the 1970s.  He is a northern Nigerian moderate of some 
influence, an Obasanjo supporter (even when that was 
unpopular), and a good Embassy contact. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Technical Review Committee was formed after a 
June 18 Council of State meeting to discuss reform of the 
local government tier of governance (reftel).  The Committee 
was also given the mandate of proposing constitutional 
amendments for consideration by a potential National 
Conference later this year.  Nigeria's elections for the 
Local Government Councils are still on hold, and caretaker 
committees selected by the governors continue to govern. 
There is no indication that the Technical Review Committee 
will finish its deliberations by the end of its originally 
scheduled 90 days. 
MEECE