This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 OTTAWA 002002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IFD/OIA FOR NEIL EFIRD AND ANN MCCONNELL 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN AND WHA/EPSC 
 
STATE PASS CEA FOR YELLEN, FRB FOR C. BERTAUT 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/IMI - D. MATHIEU 
 
PARIS ALSO FOR USOECD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV KTDB KSPR CA OPIC
SUBJECT: 2003 CANADIAN INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
REFS: (A) STATE 128494 (B) OTTAWA 1543 
 
THIS MESSAGE IS BEING E-MAILED TO NEIL EFIRD AND ANN MCCONNELL 
IN EB/IFD/OIA 
 
¶1.  This message is sensitive but unclassified; please 
protect accordingly. 
 
INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT FOR CANADA 
 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
 
General Attitude 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  With few exceptions, Canada offers foreign investors full 
national treatment within the context of a developed open 
market economy operating with democratic principles and 
institutions.  Canada is, however, one of the few OECD 
countries that still has a formal investment review process, 
and foreign investment is prohibited or restricted in several 
sectors of the economy. 
 
¶3.  Canada's economic growth depends on foreign investment 
inflows.  The stock of global foreign direct investment in 
Canada in 2002 was US$223 billion, or 32.5% of Canadian GDP. 
In terms of revenue, four foreign-owned firms rank among the 
top ten corporations in Canada and the government estimates 
that foreign investors control about one-quarter of total 
Canadian non-financial corporate assets. 
 
¶4.  The United States and Canada agree on important foreign 
investment principles, including right of establishment and 
national treatment.  The 1989 FTA recognized that a hospitable 
and secure investment climate would be indispensable if the 
two countries were to achieve the full benefits of reducing 
barriers to trade in goods and services.  The agreement 
established a mutually beneficial framework of investment 
principles sensitive to the national interests of both 
countries, with the objective of assuring that investment 
flowed freely between the two countries and that investors 
were treated in a fair and equitable manner.  The FTA provided 
higher review thresholds for US investment in Canada than for 
other foreign investors, but it did not exempt all American 
investment from review nor did it override specific foreign 
investment prohibitions, notably in the cultural area.  In 
1994 NAFTA incorporated the gains made in the FTA, expanded 
the coverage of the Investment Chapter to several new areas, 
and broadened the definition of investors with rights under 
the agreement.  It also created the right to binding investor- 
state dispute settlement arbitration in specific situations. 
 
Legal Framework: The Investment Canada Act 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  Since 1985, foreign investment policy in Canada has been 
guided by the Investment Canada Act (ICA) that replaced the 
more restrictive Foreign Investment Review Act.  Industry 
Canada is the federal department that administers most 
investments, although the federal department of Canadian 
Heritage administers investments in Canada's "cultural 
industries" (broadcasting, publishing, audio-visual production 
or sound recording). 
 
¶6.  The ICA liberalized policy on foreign investment by 
recognizing that investment is central to economic growth and 
is the key to technological advancement.  At the same time, it 
provided for review of large acquisitions in Canada by non- 
Canadians and imposed a requirement that these investments be 
of "net benefit" to Canada.  For the vast majority of small 
acquisitions, as well as the establishment of new businesses, 
foreign investors need only notify the Canadian government of 
their investment.  The text of the ICA is available at the 
following web site:  www.investcan.ic.gc.ca. 
 
¶7.  Investment Canada must be notified of any investment by a 
non-Canadian establishing a new Canadian business (regardless 
of size); acquiring direct control of any existing business 
that has assets of at least C$5 million; or acquiring indirect 
control of any existing Canadian business with assets 
exceeding C$50 million in value.  However, the C$5 million 
threshold was increased to C$223 million in 2003 if the 
acquiring non-Canadian entity is a member of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), and there is no review process for 
indirect acquisition of a Canadian business by any member of 
the WTO (with the exception of foreign acquisitions of any 
size in "cultural industries"). 
 
¶8.   While the ICA provides the basic legal framework for 
foreign investment in Canada, investment in specific sectors 
may be covered by special legislation.  For example, the Bank 
Act administers foreign investment in the financial sector 
that is within federal jurisdiction; investment in Canada's 
securities sector is covered under provincial legislation (see 
paragraph 7).  The federal Broadcast Act governs foreign 
investment in radio and television broadcasting.  Under 
provisions of the federal Telecommunications Act, foreign 
ownership of transmission facilities is limited to 20% direct 
ownership and 33% through a holding company, for an effective 
limit of 46.7% total foreign ownership. 
 
¶9.  Canada's federal system of government subjects investment 
to provincial as well as national jurisdiction.  Provincial 
restrictions on foreign investment differ by province, but are 
largely confined to the purchase of land and to certain types 
of provincially regulated financial services.  In addition, 
provincial government policies in the areas of labor relations 
and environmental protection can have an important impact on 
foreign investors. 
 
Special Treatment for US Investment 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  United States foreign investment in Canada is subject to 
the Investment Canada Act, but the NAFTA Chapter 11 further 
defines the investment relationship between the two countries 
and provides national treatment.  Regulation of Canadian 
investors in the United States and of US investors in Canada 
should result in treatment no different than that extended to 
domestic investors within each country.  Both governments are 
free to regulate the ongoing operation of business enterprises 
in their respective jurisdictions under, for example, 
antitrust law, provided they do not discriminate.  This 
principle is based on existing practice, detailed in the 
framework below. 
 
¶11.  Existing laws, policies and practices were grandfathered, 
except where specific changes were required.  The practical 
effect was to freeze the various exceptions to national 
treatment provided in Canadian and US law, such as 
restrictions on foreign ownership in the communications and 
transportation industries.  Both governments remain free to 
tax foreign-owned companies differently than domestic firms, 
provided this does not result in arbitrary or unjustifiable 
discrimination, and to exempt the sale of crown (government- 
owned) corporations from any national treatment obligations. 
Finally, the two governments retain some flexibility in the 
application of national treatment obligations.  They need not 
extend identical treatment, as long as the treatment is 
"equivalent." 
 
¶12.  The NAFTA also deals more specifically with the financial 
services sector.  Chapter 14 on financial services eliminates 
discriminatory asset and capital restrictions on US bank 
subsidiaries in Canada and exempts US firms and investors from 
the federal "10/25" rule, treating them like Canadian firms. 
The "10/25" rule prevents any single non-NAFTA, nonresident 
from acquiring more than 10% of the shares, and all such 
nonresidents in the aggregate from acquiring more than 25% of 
the shares of a federally regulated, Canadian-controlled 
financial institution.  In 2001, the GOC raised the 10% rule 
to 20% for individual (but not corporate) shareholders. 
 
¶13.  Both the 10% and the 25% limitations were eliminated for 
American investors in federally chartered, non-bank financial 
institutions.  Several provinces, however, including Ontario 
and Quebec, have similar "10/25" rules for provincially 
chartered trust and insurance companies which were not waived 
under the FTA. 
 
¶14.  The NAFTA commits both parties to expand the list of 
covered service sectors and includes a services agreement,  a 
code of principles that establishes national treatment, right 
of establishment, right of commercial presence, and 
transparency for the service sectors enumerated in annexes to 
the NAFTA.  Bilateral services trade is largely free of 
restrictions and the NAFTA ensures that new restrictions will 
not be applied.  However, existing restrictions were 
grandfathered. 
 
¶15.  The NAFTA grants US firms that operate from the United 
States national treatment for most Canadian federal 
procurement opportunities.  However, inter-provincial trade 
barriers exist which often exclude US firms established in one 
Canadian province from bidding on another province's 
procurement opportunities.  As a first step in the ongoing and 
difficult process of reducing trade barriers within Canada, 
the federal, provincial and territorial governments negotiated 
an Internal Trade Agreement that came into effect on July 1, 
¶1995.  The Agreement provides a framework for dealing with 
trade in ten specific sectors and establishes a formal process 
for resolving trade disputes (but does not apply to US firms). 
 
¶16.  Besides the areas described above, the NAFTA includes 
provisions that: enhance the ability of US investors to 
enforce their rights through international arbitration; 
prohibit a broader range of performance requirements, 
including forced technology transfer; and expand coverage of 
the Investment chapter to include portfolio and intangible 
investments as well as direct investment. 
 
Investments In "Cultural Industries" 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶17.  Canada defines "cultural industries" to include: 
 
-- the publication, distribution or sale of books, magazines, 
periodicals or newspapers, other than the sole activity of 
printing or typesetting; 
 
-- the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of film or 
video recordings, or audio or video music recordings; 
 
-- the publication, distribution or sale of music in print or 
machine-readable form; 
 
-- any radio, television and cable television broadcasting 
undertakings and any satellite programming and broadcast 
network services. 
 
¶18.  The Investment Canada Act requires that foreign 
investments in the book publishing and distribution sector be 
compatible with national cultural policies and be of net 
benefit to Canada.  Authority for reviewing prospective 
foreign investments resides with the Minister for Canadian 
Heritage.  Takeovers of Canadian-owned and controlled 
distribution businesses are not allowed.  The establishment of 
new film distribution companies in Canada will only be allowed 
for importation and distribution of proprietary products.  (In 
other words, the importer would have to own world rights or be 
a major investor).  Indirect and direct takeovers of foreign 
distribution businesses operating in Canada are allowed only 
if the investor undertakes to reinvest a portion of its 
Canadian earnings. 
 
¶19.  All investments in newspapers and periodicals require 
Canadian government review.  Authority for reviewing 
prospective foreign investments resides with the Minister for 
Canadian Heritage.  Under terms of an agreement signed in June 
1999, Canada significantly lowered its barriers to foreign 
magazines.  Canada agreed to permit up to 51% foreign equity 
in a magazine enterprise, up from the previous 25%, and to 
increase this level to 100% by June 2000.   As of June 2002, 
US magazines exported to Canada are permitted to carry 18% of 
total ad space with advertising aimed primarily at the 
Canadian market. 
 
¶20.  Canada also committed to provide non-discriminatory tax 
treatment under Section 19 of the Income Tax Act (eliminating 
the nationality requirement in June 2000), and Canadian 
advertisers may now place ads in any magazine regardless of 
the nationality of the publisher or place of production. 
Canadian advertisers, merchants and service providers may now 
claim a tax deduction for one-half of their advertising costs 
if they place ads in foreign magazines with zero to 79% 
Canadian editorial content.  They may deduct full advertising 
costs if the magazine contains 80% or more original 
(specifically for the Canadian market) editorial content. 
 
¶21.  The Broadcasting Act sets out the broadcasting policy for 
Canada, the objectives of which include enriching and 
strengthening the cultural, political, social and economic 
fabric of Canada.  The Canadian radio-television and 
telecommunications commission (CRTC) is charged with 
implementing the broadcasting policy.  Under current CRTC 
policy, in cases where a Canadian service is licensed in a 
format competitive with that of an authorized non-Canadian 
service, the commission can drop the non-Canadian service if a 
new Canadian applicant requests it to do so.  Licenses will 
not be granted or renewed to firms that do not have at least 
80% Canadian control, represented both by shareholding and by 
representation on the board of directors. 
 
Investments in the Financial Sector 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶22.  Canada is open to foreign investment in the banking, 
insurance, and securities brokerage sectors, although, unlike 
the United States, Canada still has barriers to foreign access 
to retail banking.  US firms are present in all three sectors, 
but play secondary roles, while Canadian banks have been much 
more aggressive in entering the US retail banking market 
because there are no barriers that limit access and because it 
offers more promising opportunities for investment than does 
the saturated Canadian market.  Although American and other 
foreign banks have long been able to establish banking 
subsidiaries in Canada, no US banks have attempted to 
undertake retail banking operations in Canada.  Several US 
financial institutions have established branches in Canada, 
chiefly targeting commercial lending, investment banking and 
niche markets such as credit card issuance. 
 
Investments In Other Sectors 
---------------------------- 
 
¶23.  Commercial Aviation: Foreigners are limited to 25% 
ownership of Canadian air carriers. 
 
¶24.  Energy and Mining: Foreigners cannot be majority owners 
in uranium mines.  However, there are no specific restrictions 
in other mining investment. 
 
¶25.  Telecommunications:  Under provisions of Canada's 
Telecommunications Act, direct foreign ownership of Type I 
carriers (owners/operators of transmission facilities) are 
limited to 20%.  Ownership and control rules are more flexible 
for holding companies that wish to invest in Canadian 
carriers.  Under these rules, two-thirds of the holding 
company's equity must be owned and controlled by Canadians. 
 
¶26.  Fishing:  Foreigners can own only 49% of companies that 
hold Canadian commercial fishing licenses. 
 
¶27.  Electric power is primarily under provincial jurisdiction 
in Canada, and is traditionally dominated by provincial 
government-owned firms.  Several provinces have taken steps to 
restructure their electricity sectors on competitive 
principles.  Alberta has achieved a degree of competition at 
both wholesale and retail levels. 
 
¶28.  In Ontario in recent years, the provincial monopoly 
utility was split up into generation, transmission and 
distribution components, and some competition was introduced 
at the retail level.  However, in April 2002, a court ruling 
blocked a planned initial public offering of the provincial 
government-owned transmission grid operator, Hydro One.  In 
November 2002, the Ontario government froze retail power rates 
at 4.3 cents/KWH for most customers until 2006.  Since then, 
the government has struggled to increase generating capacity 
with little help from private investment. 
 
¶29.  Health Services: Hospitals in Canada are integral parts 
of a public health system administered by the provinces. 
Private hospitals would not be eligible to receive payments 
from provincial health insurance funds, and, therefore, would 
not be financially viable in most cases. However, the 
provincial health systems have always relied on private sector 
provision of many goods and services, and in recent years they 
have increasingly turned to private firms to supply diagnostic 
services and, particularly in Alberta, routine surgery.  The 
governments of Canada and Alberta have disputed whether the 
latter is permissible under the Canada Health Act.  To the 
extent that private firms are allowed to provide these 
services, U.S.-based companies are well positioned to compete. 
 
¶30.  Real estate: primary responsibility for property law 
rests with the provinces. Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, 
and Nova Scotia all limit real estate sales to out-of-province 
parties.  There is no constitutional protection for property 
rights in Canada.  Consequently, government authorities can 
expropriate property, but appropriate compensation must be 
paid.  However, US individual investors have been troubled by 
changes in zoning or environmental regulations that affect use 
of their property (ref B). 
 
¶31.  Privatization: Each specific privatization (at the 
federal or provincial levels of government) is considered on a 
case-by-case basis, and there is no overall policy limitation 
on foreign ownership.  As an example, the federal Department 
of Transport did not impose any limitations in the 
privatization of Canadian National Railway, whose current 
majority shareholders are now US citizens. 
Investment Incentives 
--------------------- 
 
¶32.  Both federal and provincial governments in Canada offer a 
wide array of investment incentives.  (Municipalities are 
legally prohibited from offering tax incentives.)  None of the 
federal incentives, however, are specifically aimed at 
promoting or discouraging foreign investment in Canada. 
Rather, the incentives are designed to accomplish broader 
policy goals, such as investment in research and development, 
or promotion of regional economies.  They are available to any 
qualified investor, Canadian or foreign, who agrees to use the 
funds for the stated purpose.  Provincial incentives tend to 
be more investor-specific and are conditioned on applying the 
funds to an investment in the granting province.  Provincial 
incentives may also be restricted to firms established in the 
province or that agree to establish a facility in the 
province. 
 
¶33.  Incentives for investment in cultural industries, at both 
the federal and provincial level, are generally available only 
to Canadian-controlled firms.  Incentives may take the form of 
grants, loans, loan guarantees, venture capital, or tax 
credits.  Incentive programs in Canada generally are not 
oriented toward the promotion of exports.  Provincial 
incentive programs for film and television production in 
Canada are available to and used by foreign firms, so Canadian 
taxpayers have heavily subsidized U.S.-financed productions in 
recent years. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------- 
 
¶34.  Private property rights are fully protected by Canada's 
legal system.  Foreigners have full and fair access to 
Canada's legal system.  Only the rights of governments to 
establish monopolies and to expropriate for public purposes 
limit property rights.  Investors from NAFTA countries have 
mechanisms available to them for dispute resolution regarding 
property expropriation by the Government of Canada. 
 
Performance Requirements/Incentives 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶35.  Canada does not explicitly negotiate performance 
requirements with foreign investors.  For investments subject 
to review, the Canadian Government can examine resource 
processing, domestic content, exports, and technology 
development or transfer.  A special duty remission scheme 
exists for the automotive sector that makes certain benefits 
contingent on trade performance.  NAFTA Article 1106 prohibits 
the United States or Canada from imposing export or domestic 
content performance requirements.  Government officials at 
both the federal and provincial levels expect investors who 
receive investment incentives to use them for the agreed 
purpose, but no enforcement mechanism exists. 
 
Regulatory System: Laws and Procedures 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶36.  Canada's regulatory system is similar to that of the 
United States in terms of its transparency and broad array of 
institutions involved.  Proposed regulatory laws are subject 
to parliamentary debate and public hearings, and regulations 
are issued in draft form for public comment prior to 
implementation.  While federal and/or provincial licenses or 
permits may be needed to engage in economic activities, this 
kind of regulation is generally for statistical or tax 
compliance reasons.  The Bureau of Competition Policy and the 
Competition Tribunal, a quasi-judicial body, enforce Canada's 
antitrust legislation. 
 
Labor 
----- 
 
¶37.  The Federal government and Provincial/territorial 
governments share jurisdiction for labor regulation and 
standards.  For example, employees in the railroad, airline 
and banking sectors are covered under the federally 
administered "Canada Labor Code" while employees in most other 
sectors would come under provincial labor codes.   As the laws 
vary somewhat from one jurisdiction to another, it is 
advisable to contact a federal or provincial labor office for 
specifics such as minimum wage and benefit requirements.  From 
the 1960s to the 1990s, Canada's relatively generous federal 
employment insurance and other social programs, combined with 
its high rate of unionization compared to the United States, 
made the Canadian labor force relatively inflexible and kept 
unemployment rates relatively high.  In recent years, however, 
these differences have narrowed, due particularly to the 
restructuring of the employment insurance program. 
 
¶38.  Due in part to the value of the Canadian dollar relative 
to the US dollar, Canadian wage and benefit levels for most 
non-executive job categories are somewhat lower than levels 
paid in the United States.   In 2001, the proportion of union 
membership among those in paid employment was 32%, which 
reflects a 19% union membership rate in the private sector and 
a 72% union membership rate in the public sector.  This union 
participation rate is about twice that seen in the United 
States. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶39.  Canadian federal and provincial laws recognize both the 
right of the government to expropriate private property for a 
public purpose, and the obligation to pay compensation.  The 
federal government has not nationalized any foreign firm since 
the nationalization of Axis property during World War II. 
Both the federal and provincial governments have also assumed 
control of private firms -- usually financially distressed 
ones -- after reaching agreement with the former owners.  (See 
ref B for more detail on expropriation claims.) 
 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
¶40.  Canada is a member of the New York Convention of 1958 on 
the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards. 
The Canadian government has made a decision in principle to 
become a member of the International Center for the Settlement 
of Investment Disputes (ICSID).  However, since the legal 
enforcement mechanism for ICSID would be the provincial court 
system, the federal government must also obtain agreement from 
the provinces that they will enforce ICSID decisions.  It is 
unlikely that this will happen in the foreseeable future. 
 
¶41.  Canada accepts binding arbitration of investment disputes 
to which it is a party only when it has specifically agreed to 
do so through a bilateral or multilateral agreement, such as a 
Foreign Investment Protection Agreement.  The provisions of 
Chapter 11 of the NAFTA guide the resolution of investment 
disputes between the United States and Canada.  The NAFTA 
encourages parties to settle disputes through consultation or 
negotiation.  It also establishes special arbitration 
procedures for investment disputes separate from the NAFTA's 
general dispute settlement provisions.  Under the NAFTA, a 
narrow range of disputes (those dealing with government 
monopolies and expropriation) between an investor from a NAFTA 
country and a NAFTA government may be settled, at the 
investor's option, by binding international arbitration.  An 
investor who seeks binding arbitration in a dispute with a 
NAFTA party gives up his right to seek redress through the 
court system of the NAFTA party, except for proceedings 
seeking non-monetary damages. 
 
Political Violence 
------------------ 
 
¶42.  Although rare, political violence does occur in Canada. 
Serbian demonstrators protesting the air war in Kosovo 
vandalized the United States Consulate General in Toronto in 
¶1999.  In addition, there have been some violent incidents 
related to trade and environmental disputes. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements and Tax Treaties 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶43.  While the terms of the FTA and the NAFTA guide investment 
relations between the United States and Canada, Canada has 
also negotiated international investment agreements with non- 
NAFTA parties.  These agreements, known as Foreign Investment 
Protection Agreements (FIPAs), are bilateral treaties that 
promote and protect foreign investment through a system of 
legally binding rights and obligations based on the same 
principles found in the NAFTA.  Within Canada's overall 
foreign investment strategy, FIPAs complement the NAFTA. 
Canada has negotiated FIPAs with countries in Central Europe, 
Latin America, Africa and Asia, and has over 100 international 
tax treaties in force.  Please refer to the following Internet 
web site for more information: www.fin.gc.ca 
 
Capital Outflow Policy 
---------------------- 
 
¶44.  The Canadian dollar is fully convertible.  The Canadian 
government provides some incentives for Canadian investment in 
developing countries through Canadian International 
Development Agency (CIDA) programs.  Canada's official export 
credit agency, the Export Development Corporation (EDC), 
provides OPIC-like insurance coverage for Canadian foreign 
investment. 
Tables:   Foreign Direct Investment Data and 
          2002 Mergers & Acquisition Activity 
 
Line 1 = C$ Millions 
Line 2 = US$ Millions 
 
Canadian  Foreign   Direct   Invest  Abroad 
 
                             Other            All 
Year      U.S.      U.K.     E.U.    Japan    Other    Total 
 
1998        133267   24956  29149    3268  70269 260909 
             89862   16828  19655    2204  47382 175931 
 
1999        151775   25686  28384    3853  81032 290730 
            102141   17287  19102    2593  54535 195661 
 
2000        177839   35164  39162    5664  95321 353150 
            148522   23676  26368    3814  64180 237776 
 
2001        188791   39742  41607    7033 112486 389660 
            121921   25665  26870    4542  72643 251642 
 
2002        201792   45241  54612    9203 120971 431819 
            128501   28809  34777    5860  77034 274982 
Foreign  Direct    Invest     In    Canada 
 
                             Other            All 
Year      U.S.      U.K.     E.U.    Japan    Other   Total 
 
1998        146893   17042  31126    8393  15935 219389 
             99050   11491  20988    5659  10745 147934 
 
1999        176045   15279  36341    8270  16629 252563 
            118478   10283  24457    5566  11191 169975 
 
2000        191870   23184  63240    8126  21171 307591 
            129186   15610  42579    5471  14254 207101 
 
2001        214227   25204  65954    7909  20342 333635 
            138348   16277  42593    5108  13137 215461 
 
2002        224330   26273  67700    8600  22485 349388 
            142853   16731  43111    5476  14318 222490 
Source:  Statistics Canada 
 
TOP FIVE LARGEST MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS ANNOUNCED AND 
COMPLETED IN CANADA IN 2002:(VALUES IN US$ AND C$ BILLIONS) 
 
VALUE     NAME                               ROLE 
 
US$5.9    Alberta Energy Co. Ltd.            Target 
(C$9.2)   PanCanadian Energy Corp.           Target 
 
US$4.1    Manulife Financial Corp.           Acquirer 
(C$6.4)   Canada Life Financial Corp.        Target 
 
US$4.1    BCE Inc.                           Acquirer 
(C$6.3)   Bell Canada                        Target 
          SBC Communications Inc.            Vendor 
 
US$2.0    Petro-Canada                       Acquirer 
(C$3.2)   Oil & Gas Properties (Int'l)       Target 
          British Petroleum Co. PLC          Vendor 
          Veba Oil & Gas GmbH                Vendor 
 
US$1.9    ONTARIO TEACHERS PENSION 
(C3.0)    PLAN BOARD                         ACQUIRER 
          Kholberg Kravis Roberts & Co.      Acquirer 
          Telephone Director Business (Can.) Target 
          BCE Inc.                           Vendor 
 
Source: Crosbie & Company Investment Bank 
 
Cellucci