This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0270 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  ADANA CONSULATE ATTACKER CONVICTED, 
          SENTENCED TO FIVE YEARS 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  The Adana Second Felony Court gave its 
final verdict at the October 16 hearing. The 
court initially imposed a sentence of six years 
imprisonment and a fine of 346,783,000 TL 
(approximately 230 USD) but taking his good 
behavior and confession into account, reduced his 
sentence by one-sixth to 5 years and 288,985,000 
TL (approximately 285 USD). The defendant has the 
right to appeal the decision and was represented 
by counsel at the hearing. 
 
 
¶2.  (U) Cumali Kizilkoca attacked the US 
Consulate in Adana with hand grenades on June 11, 
¶2003. Consulate guards subdued the attacker and 
surrendered him to the duty TNP at the Consulate. 
Based on questioning of the assailant, the 
attacker had no bonds with any terrorist 
organization. Kizilkoca expressed his anger at 
Israel's attacks on Palestinians and wanted to 
take revenge from the Israelis. Because there was 
no Israeli diplomatic mission in Adana, he 
attacked the US Consulate instead. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) At the hearing (which was attended by 
POLOFF and POL LES), it was discovered that 
Cumali Kizilkoca, who was previously convicted of 
another crime by the Ninth Peace Court of 
Criminal Jurisdiction, was on probation 
subsequent to a recent general amnesty when he 
attacked the Consulate. 
REID