This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 003942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR BSC/WHA, EB 
NSC FOR DEMPSEY 
DOE FOR GWARD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EINV EFIN PGOV ECON BR
SUBJECT:  PRESIDENT LULA ANNOUNCES BRAZIL'S NEW ENERGY MODEL 
 
REF:  A. BRASILIA 3405 
      ¶B. BRASILIA 3088 
      ¶C. BRASILIA 2859 
 
¶1.  President Lula announced Brazil's new energy model and 
signed the provisional measures (MP) to implement it on 
December 11.  The MP was published in the Official Daily of 
the Union December 12.  The GoB had long reiterated its 
intent to introduce the model before year's end, but there 
was doubt as to whether it would do so by MP or by 
submitting a bill to the legislature.  The MP gave the 
energy model the full force of the law as written, and was 
to be debated in congress within 60 days, with a potential 
extension of another 60 days.  On January 16, "O Globo" 
online reported that the PSDB party had filed a Supreme 
Court injunction complaining that to enact the new model via 
MP was unconstitutional.  The injunction suspends the effect 
of the MP until the Supreme Court either decides it is 
unconstitutional, which kills the MP, or allows the bill to 
move forward, thereby starting the 60-day clock.  Still, 
Lula's proclamation formally fulfills another major item on 
his policy agenda for his first year. 
 
¶2.  Mines and Energy Minister Rousseff, Finance Minister 
Palocci, and Chief of Staff Dirceu were all present for the 
ceremony, along with presidents of five state-owned 
generation companies.  Glaringly absent were any company 
presidents from the private sector.  Brazilian daily 'Valor 
Economico' reported December 12 that distributors and 
private generating companies were dissatisfied with the 
model's "lack of isonomy" (i.e., its purportedly advantaging 
state-owned entities over private enterprise in the energy 
sector), and chose not to be present. 
 
¶3. The main tenets of the new energy model unveiled in July 
by Rousseff (Ref. C) remain intact.  Two contractual 
environments are to co-exist: a regulated pool for "captive" 
customers, and an unregulated "free" market.  The Electric 
Energy Trading Chamber (CCEE) is to replace the current 
Wholesale Energy Market (MAE) and administer the pool. 
Distributors are to purchase energy from the pool via bid, 
with the winner being the distributor guaranteeing its 
captive consumers the lowest tariffs.  Current concession 
contracts will be honored to expiration, so that the first 
large auction under the new rules should take place in 2005, 
when up to 50% of the existing contracts expire.  As 
concessions for "captive" consumers are granted, CCEE is to 
administer bilateral contracts between all sixty-four 
distributors and the generators concerned, as described in 
ref. c.  The "free" environment is to be unregulated, with 
the free customers and distributors able to negotiate their 
own contracts.  Generators, 80% of which are still publicly- 
owned, will be the only entities allowed to contract in both 
environments. 
 
¶4.  The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) will grant 
generation concessions.  Those concessions are to be 
auctioned in megawatt blocks, rather than by project as they 
are now.  Auctions of both generation and transmission 
concessions will be conducted through ANEEL based on the 
regulations of, and with oversight from, the National 
Council for Energy Policy (CNPE) -- an existing body that is 
controlled by MME. 
 
¶5.  The National Operator of Electrical Systems (ONS) is to 
remain responsible for the coordination and control of 
generation and transmission operations, and for 
administration the contracting of transmission installation. 
Currently, ONS is an industry entity, but under the new 
energy model three of five directors will be selected by 
MME, and the other two by the private sector.  The 
directors' current two-year mandates will change to four- 
year terms. 
 
¶6. Two planning bureaucracies are to be set up: the 
Electricity Sector Monitoring Committee (CMSE), which will 
monitor the sector's ability to meet energy needs in the 
short term (5 years); and the Energy Research Company (EPE), 
which will be responsible for medium and long-term planning 
(up to twenty years) for energy expansion.  EPE will also 
establish requirements for the safety reserve. 
 
¶7.  Early reaction in the press is that the new energy model 
puts a damper on foreign investment and strengthens the 
power of the state.  Claudio Sales, president of CBIEE, an 
association of the 15 largest private investors in the 
energy sector, told 'Valor' December 12 that the 
concentration of decision-making and regulation would be in 
the hands of MME and state-owned Electrobras, which opens 
the door to political pressure on the sector.  A headline in 
the December 14 edition of 'O Estado de Sao Paulo' 
proclaimed, "For the Market, Only the State Will Invest in 
the Sector".  Andre Valle, post-graduate energy coordinator 
at the Getulio Vargas Foundation, told 'Estado' that the 
government must now prove it has money to pump into the 
electrical sector; the new rules discourage private 
investment, especially foreign investment. 
 
¶8.  Mission will follow up with more industry reaction and 
analysis on the new energy model as extra detail emerges. 
 
HRINAK