This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 002148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WARSAW FOR DCM CAMERON HUNTER PLEASE PASS TO MARY HAINES 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/EX AND NEA/FO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/02/2003 
TAGS: OVIP KU
SUBJECT: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR POTUS JUNE VISIT TO KUWAIT 
 
REF: A. (A) HAINES-URBANCIC TELECON OF TUESDAY 
 
     ¶B. MAY 20 
     ¶C. (B) WHITE HOUSE 172107Z 
     ¶D. (C) WHITE HOUSE 171958Z 
 
Classified By: DCM Frank C. Urbancic, reason: 1.5 (a) and (b). 
 
¶1. (C) Embassy and GOK warmly welcomes POTUS visit to Kuwait 
in June and stand ready to assist. POTUS has been invited to 
stay as the guest of the Kuwaitis at the Bayan Palace.  After 
points made in ref (a), Embassy offers the following 
information on building blocks. 
 
-- Notional schedule follows: 
 
Thursday, May 22 
 
1740 - Pre-advance Team Arrives in Kuwait.  Met upon arrival 
in Kuwait by DCM. RSO will also greet the White House team 
and will be available to take relevant members of the team on 
tour of airport facilities, if desired. Please advise. 
 
RON - Reservations made at the JW Marriott Hotel.  Point of 
contact at hotel is Tessa Ikdal Costa.  Phone numbers are: 
(965) 241-5072 Ext. 2367, Cell phone: (965) 676-5775. 
 
Friday, May 23 
 
0830 - Depart Hotel for Embassy 
 
0900 - Introductory meeting with key embassy and military 
staff. All relevant military contacts who will be involved in 
POTUS visit to Camp Doha will also be present at this meeting 
and available for consultation. 
 
1025 - Depart Embassy for Amiri Diwan 
 
1030 - Meet with host government officials and tour 
facilities (banquet hall, lodgings, meeting rooms, press 
center, etc.) 
 
1230 - Depart for Camp Doha 
 
1300 - Lunch at Camp Doha 
 
1345 - Meet with U.S. military staff in charge of planning 
for POTUS June visit 
 
1700 - Depart Camp Doha 
 
1745 - Arrive at Hotel 
 
RON 
 
Saturday, May 24 
 
0900 - Depart Kuwait 
 
¶2.  (C) Request confirmation that above notional schedule 
contains basic elements White House desires.  We will shift 
priorities as necessary. 
 
¶3.  (C) Point of Contact personnel are as follows: 
 
Control Officer DCM Frank C., Urbancic, home tele: (965) 
390-5947, office tele: (965) 539-4723, mobile: (965) 962-0784 
 
OMC-K Colonel Campbell, home tele: (965) 541-1000, office 
tele: (965) 539-5307/08, ext. 2274, mobile: (965) 970-3253 
 
Camp Doha Colonel John Della Jacono, Deputy Chief of Staff, 
(965) 468-2987 or 468-7404 
 
Political Counselor, Richard Bell, home tele: (965) 538-5536, 
office tele: (965) 539-5307/08, Ext. 2457/2552. 
 
Administrative Counselor John Lavelle, home tele: (965) 
538-6732, office tele: (965) 539-5307/08, ext. 2459/2516 
JONES