This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002615 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO PGOV HO
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 4, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" on 
11/5 entitled "Powell".  "Throughout the uncertain times Honduras 
is going through, the visit of Colin Powell to Honduras has 
brought very good news.  The U.S. Secretary of State has said 
that Honduras could be one of the countries to be benefited from 
the Millennium Account that will allocate 5 billion dollars for 
developing countries.  These funds will be given to those 
countries committed to democracy and those that have implemented 
social, economic and political reforms which will ensure economic 
openness." 
 
"There's no doubt that Honduras will qualify to access to these 
funds, because we're a developing country and we have done the 
necessary efforts to implement a series of comprehensive 
political, social and economic reforms.  And, the most important 
thing is that we have sent Honduran troops to Iraq." 
 
"Powell, who is a very influential figure in the American 
political arena, took this opportunity to thank for the Honduran 
support for being part of the original coalition of nations that 
sent troops to Iraq, when other countries refused to do so.  The 
importance of sending troops to Iraq isn't the number of soldiers 
we have sent, it is actually our willingness to help." 
 
Palmer