This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 001686 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
FOR NEA ASSISTANT SECRETARY BURNS AND S/CT COFER BLACK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC JO
SUBJECT: FOLLOW UP DEMARCHES TO HOST GOVERNMENTS ON IRAQI 
INTELLIGENCE OFFICERS 
 
REF: STATE 71552 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR EDWARD W. GNEHM, REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Jordan is a unique case in a number of ways.  Our 
close relationship at the most senior levels enables us to 
maintain a candid and forthright exchange on this specific 
subject -- the expulsion of Iraqi intelligence officers. 
ORCA has and continues to work closely on this matter.  GID 
is closely monitoring IIS agents and emphasized today that 
they have intensified that effort. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  In addition, Ambassador raised this subject in 
his meeting today (March 19) with the King, GID Director 
Kheir, and ORCA representatives.  They told the Ambassador 
that their concerns for what IIS agents might do against both 
Jordanian and American targets was parallel to ours.  They 
added, however, that they have no knowledge of IIS plans to 
conduct retaliatory actions against the U.S. Embassy or 
American personnel in Jordan.  Nevertheless, they had greatly 
expanded their surveillance and were prepared to take 
whatever action might be required in the face of specific 
activities or intelligence.  They remain, however, deeply 
concerned about the international attention given to the 
expulsion of IIS agents by many countries around the world at 
U.S. request.  Such publicity, coupled with the general 
public hostility to U.S. military actions against Iraq, were 
cause for a careful and well-thought plan to deal with IIS 
agents.  They were firmly committed to taking action at the 
right time and that right time is related to the commencement 
of hostilities. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  COMMENT:  The King and GID understand completely 
our concern and have taken expanded measures to protect us 
and enhance their own security.  They are at this point in 
time staying away from expulsions.  In their opinion, such 
actions would signal too early and too clearly either to Iraq 
or their own citizens that they are abetting U.S. military 
actions against Iraq.  We fully expect that they will indeed 
move against IIS agents as necessary in the next few days. 
GNEHM