This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 KATHMANDU 001357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA, H, SA/INS, S/CT 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USAID/ANE AND A/A CHAMBERLIN 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/17/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PREF ETRD MASS NP XD
SUBJECT: NEPAL: JULY 20-25 VISIT TO WASHINGTON OF FOREIGN 
SECRETARY ACHARYA 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b) and 
 (d). 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable contains an action request at paragraph 17. 
 
Summary: Issues the Secretary Intends to Address in 
Washington 
============================================= ================= 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On July 17, the Ambassador, DCM, and poloff met 
with Nepal's Foreign Secretary, Madhu Raman Acharya, to 
discuss his upcoming visit to Washington.  In a very cordial 
session, a well-prepared Acharya walked through the key 
points presented in his non-paper (provided in its entirety 
at paragraph 19).  Key issues discussed included: 
-- The strong and increasingly cooperative U.S.-Nepal 
relationship; 
-- Nepal's security situation; 
-- Nepal's political situation, including prospects for 
elections; 
-- Nepal's application to the World Trade Organization; 
-- Bhutanese and Tibetan refugees; 
-- Senator Feinstein's languishing bill on Nepali garmetn 
exports to the U.S.; 
-- Article 98 Agreement entry into force; 
-- Progress in settling Bhote Koshi Power Company dispute; 
-- South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC); 
-- Counter-terrorism cooperation; and 
-- Security cooperation, including Nepalese troops to Iraq 
and U.S. military assistance. 
End summary. 
 
Security Situation 
=================== 
 
¶3.  (C) Overview:  Maoist-Government dialogue has continued 
informally.  The Maoists have requested written commitments 
on constitutional amendments or a constituent assembly.  The 
Government has made a firm offer, in writing, to renew 
official dialogue.  A Maoist response was expected later that 
day.  Acharya reported that during informal discussions, the 
Maoist leadership refused to acknowledge continued extortion 
by members of the Maoist party.  The Maoists' refusal has 
forced the Government of Nepal (GoN) to make some arrests. 
Acharya stated that these arrests pose some risk to the 
ongoing peace talks, but he seeks USG understanding. 
 
¶4.  (C) Integrated Security/Peace Development Plan (ISDP) 
Implementation:  In addition to the points in the Acharya's 
non-paper, he added that a Secretariat is being created for 
ISDP implementation.  This step will breathe life into the 
long-dormant plan intended to restart government services in 
conflict affected areas and re-build much needed 
infrastructure. 
 
¶5.  (C) Negotiation Assistance:  The Ambassador asked Acharya 
if international monitors/facilitators would be useful in 
negotiations with the Maoists.  He replied that international 
assistance might be necessary but not at this stage.  Acharya 
stated that offers of assistance would be interpreted as 
expressions of support and concern by the international 
community.  They would not be dismissed out of hand. 
 
¶6.  (C) Human Rights:  Acharya called the Ambassador's and 
DCM's attention to the recent prosecution of Royal Nepalese 
Army personnel for human rights violations (septel).  He 
stated that these cases are the first but would not be the 
last.  Acharya stated that earlier investigations and 
prosecutions of human rights abuses were not possible due to 
the inability of the army, due to Maoist threats, to bring 
investigators to the scene of alleged violations. 
 
Political Situation 
==================== 
 
¶7.  (C) Acharya affirmed the GoN's commitment to holding 
elections.  He reported that the Prime Minister is optimistic 
about eventually bringing more political parties into his 
interim administration.  (Note:  The budget for the next 
fiscal year released later the same day has a budget 
allocation (septel) to cover election expenses should they be 
held. End note.) 
World Trade Organization (WTO) 
=============================== 
 
¶8.  (C) The GoN is currently negotiating in the Third Working 
Party meeting in Geneva.  Acharya stated that the GoN has 
responded to all U.S. bilateral requests regarding industrial 
goods.  Legislation in accordance with the GoN's WTO action 
plan is being drafted.  Technical assistance from the USG 
would be appreciated.  Acharya requested US understanding on 
being unable to meet all U.S. requirements for agricultural 
goods, and that the current offer to greatly liberalize 
Nepal's services industry should be seen as a great step 
forward, especially when compared with restrictions in 
neighboring countries. 
 
Senator Feinstein's Garment Bill 
================================= 
 
¶9.  (C) Secretary Acharya will be prepared to discuss both 
the deportation of Tibetans and the payment dispute of the 
Bhote Koshi Power Company, and their effect on the garment 
bill's prospects. 
 
¶10.  (C) Bhote Koshi Power Company (BKPC) Dispute:  The GoN 
has deducted payments due to BKPC without explanation.  The 
amount of deductions has grown to USD 1.5 million.  The U.S. 
Secretary of State has received a number of letters from 
 
SIPDIS 
concerned Members of Congress on this issue.  In a new 
developemnt, Acharya revealed that Nepal's Cabinet had 
directed the Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) to accept an 
offer tendered during informal meetings, whereby NEA will pay 
the full amount of the invoice.  Discrepancies in the average 
versus actual charges will be reconciled at the end of the 
contract year.  This resolution needs to be approved by the 
NEA Board.  (Note:  This decision has not yet been briefed to 
the local representatives of the BKPC.  End note.) 
 
Refugees 
========= 
 
¶11.  (C) Bhutanese:  Acharya thanked the Ambassador for his 
recent public statement calling for the engagement of UNHCR 
in the repatriation of refugees from Eastern Nepal back to 
Bhutan.  He stated that despite concerns, Nepal and Bhutan 
need international support for the bilateral progress to 
continue.  Acharya is concerned that repeated condemnations 
of the bilateral process will undermine the recent forward 
movement achieved towrad resolving the twelve year-old issue. 
 He reported that the GoN is about whether with the 
citizenship and property of the returning refugees will be 
reinstated, but stated firmly that Nepal cannot raise these 
issues directly with Thimpu.  Acharya requested that the USG 
and other international parties work constructively with 
Bhutan to establish a presence there to monitor repatriation. 
 
¶12.  (C) Tibetans:  Acharya repeated the Prime Minister's 
June 16 statement that the deportation of the 19 Tibetans was 
an error.  He reported that the GoN was under tremendous 
pressure by the Government of China to deport them.  The 
negative publicity has, in his view, discouraged the Chinese 
from making such demands in the future.  Acharya asserted 
that the GoN has demonstrated its seriousness in returning to 
previous policies by handing over undocumented Tibetans to 
UNHCR in two separate cases and continuing to allow busloads 
of UNHCR-processed Tibetans to transit the country to India. 
(Note:  While in Washington, the GoN may seek quiet meetings 
with Representatives of the Dalai Lama in order to coordinate 
on areas of mutual interest.  End note.) 
 
Counter-Terrorism Cooperation and Listing of the Maoists 
============================================= ============ 
 
¶13.  (C) Acharya briefly covered joint cooperation between 
the U.S. and Nepal on counter-terrorism.  He urged the U.S. 
to avoid language referring to cooperation on border 
security.  The language on this issue in the recently signed 
Anti-Terrorism Agreement caused some surprising concern in 
India.  He also wanted to alert the USG that should the peace 
talks move forward, the GoN may request that the U.S. remove 
the Maoists from its terrorist watch list.  The Ambassador 
reminded Acharya that the murderers of two Embassy guards 
have not yet been brought to justice and that the Maoists 
have issued a fresh threat to U.S.-affiliated Nepalese 
(septel).  Acharya stated that he understood and repeated 
that such a request would be made only if there was progress 
towards peace. 
 
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) 
============================================= ============ 
 
¶14.  (C) Acharya offered to brief interested parties in 
Washington on the recently completed meeting in Kathmandu of 
the SAARC Standing Committee of foreign secretaries.  Acharya 
chaired the meeting as Nepal was the host for the conference. 
 He reported that Indo-Pak dialogue was assisted in the 
recent meeting.  He requested, however, additional U.S. 
assistance in reducing Indo-Pak tension, for the benefit of 
the entire South Asian region. 
 
U.S. Military Assistance 
========================= 
 
¶15.  (C) The Secretary requested that the USG continue to 
deliver military assistance.  He cited the fragility of the 
current cease-fire and the need to maintain Nepalese security 
forces in the longer term for peacekeeping.  He stated that 
he will pursue the items identified in the Pacific Command's 
Assessment Team Report, including items that fall outside 
current funding levels, such as helicopters.  Since Nepalese 
troops may deploy to Iraq and will certainly continue to be 
active participants in future UN-led peacekeeping operations, 
Acharya argued that larger U.S. military assistance would be 
a "good investment." 
 
Nepalese Deployment for Iraq Stabilization 
=========================================== 
 
¶16.  (C) Acharya stated that he would be prepared to discuss 
issues related to the deployment of Nepalese troops to Iraq. 
Nepalese troops will require airlift to the theater and 
support once on the ground. 
 
=============== 
Action Request 
=============== 
 
¶17.  (C) Acharya is a young and intelligent Secretary, 
prepared to hold wide-ranging discussions on Nepal and South 
Asia.  In order to facilitate a constructive interaction, 
Acharya has offered to address a roundtable with 
representatives of interested bureaus in the Department and 
of other USG agencies.  Post urges the Department to take 
advantage of this opportunity to hear directly from one of 
our key interlocutors.  End action request. 
 
Comment 
======== 
 
¶18.  (C) Acharya is clearly heading to Washington to provide 
damage control on Tibetans and request greater security 
assistance.  As sweeteners, the Cabinet has moved to resolve 
a nagging business dispute, reaffirmed support for democracy, 
and addressed human rights abuses.  For a Secretary working 
without a separate Foreign Minister (the Prime Minister is 
now the titular Foreign Minister), Acharya has done 
remarkably well in convincing the Cabinet to take USG 
concerns seriously.  The fragility of the cease-fire and the 
large uncertainties of the political environment put a strong 
pressure on Acharya to return with tangible benefits.  In 
many ways, the expectations placed by the GoN on this trip 
are similar to those placed on former Prime Minister Deuba 
during his visit last year. 
 
Non-Paper Presented by Foreign Secretary Acharya 
============================================= ==== 
¶19.  (C) Begin Text: 
 
Title:  Foreign Secretary's Visit to Washington, DC (July 
20-25, 2003) 
 
Purpose:  This will be a consultation visit in continuation 
of the exchange of such visits in recent years.  Among other 
things, the Foreign Secretary intends to discuss with the 
concerned U authorities the ongoing bilateral cooperation 
(security and development), current political situation in 
Nepal, matters related to Nepal's accession to the WTO, 
Bhutanese and Tibetan refugee issues, proposed bill for 
granting "duty free quota free access" to the US market, 
cooperation against international terrorism, US request for 
Nepalese troops to Iraq, and the progress in the recent 
meeting of the SAARC Foreign Secretaries held in Kathmandu. 
 
Political Situation:  Government is committed to continue to 
seek resolution with the Maoists through negotiations. 
Informal negotiations are being held.  There are some issues, 
such as implementation of the previously agreed points, which 
are causing problems.  Maoists are also seeking the written 
confirmation of the government's position on each of the 
issues they had proposed earlier as "substantive agenda." 
Formal negotiations will be held very soon.  There are 
occasional violations of the cease-fire, but not threatening 
the peace process itself.  Reports of extortion from 
businesses and people and from foreign establishments are 
increasing in frequency.  Their leadership is denying the 
allegations. 
 
Among the government's agenda is the effort to reconcile with 
the main political parties, which are agitating in the 
streets demanding an all party-government, restoration of the 
parliament and now some political demands as well as 
transparency in the assets of the late and present King.  PM 
is taking a very soft and conciliatory approach, and is 
confident of their support at the end.  At least, he is 
hopeful of the support of the Nepali Congress. 
 
The government is committed to holding elections as soon as 
possible.  The chances of declaring the parliamentary or 
local elections very soon are limited, as it is extremely 
unlikely that the Maoists will support this before a 
political settlement. 
 
Security Cooperation:  Although cooperation in 
counter-insurgency training matters is progressing very well, 
other materials and equipment under the Foreign Military 
Financing (USD 14 million) pledged by the US have not 
arrived.  The security forces prefer helicopters (two MI-17 
and Huey II armed helicopters) and other items (M16A2 rifles, 
M203 grenade launchers, night vision sets, HF radio sets, 
pilot protective gear).  The US assessment team has also 
identified these items.  In view of the fragile cease-fire 
situation, strengthening the capability of the security 
forces still remains a top priority.  Apart from the 
deliveries (Dec. 2002 and July 2003), purchase of M16A2 
rifles will continue as planned. 
 
Nepal is for continuation of the "Enhanced International 
Peacekeeping Capability (EIPC)" (USD 1.3 million, since 2000) 
under the US support for training and procurement of 
equipment to enhance Nepal's peacekeeping capabilities. 
 
Integrated Security and Development Program (ISDP):  His 
Majesty's Government is committed to this concept.  But its 
implementation needs to be made simple and workable, since 
most of the program will be implemented at the field level. 
His Majesty's Government has allocated additional funds in 
the coming year's budget to expand the ISDP project.  The 
Cabinet is considering a proposal for establishing the ISDP 
Secretariat in Kathmandu.  We intend to expand it to eight 
 
SIPDIS 
additional districts around Kathmandu Valley, in addition to 
the existing eight in the mid-west hilly region.  The 
nomenclature from "security" (ISDP) to "peace" (IPDP) should 
not be a major problem.  The security agencies still want to 
call it ISDP. 
 
Terrorism:  There is a special political significance of 
signing a bilateral cooperation between the two countries on 
cooperation against international terrorism.  We also intend 
to benefit from the training opportunities offered by the US 
Government.  We need to avoid using the words "control over 
international border" in view of the regional sensitivity. 
We have informed our neighbors that this relates to training 
of personnel only and it is not directed against them.  The 
inclusion of the Nepalese Maoists in the "other terrorists" 
list of the US Government has a irked them a little bit.  But 
it will not affect the negotiations.  We think this is 
something the USG can review on basis of development in the 
negotiations and their commitment to peaceful pursuit of 
their cause. 
 
Troops Issue:  His Majesty's Government of Nepal is 
considering a US request for troops for Iraq.  There are 
diverging views.  Public opinion is divided for an against 
the case of Nepalese troops to Iraq.  Increased involvement 
of the UN in the peacekeeping role would sort out this 
problem in the long run.  Our military does not have the 
capacity to airlift the troops and equipment and would 
require assistance.  We can adopt the Haiti model, in which 
troops and equipment were airlifted by the US.  This can be 
discussed. 
 
WTO Accession:  Nepal's accession to the WTO has reached a 
crucial stage.  We have submitted our revised consolidated 
offer, including the legislative action plan.  Our offer has 
gone quite far in view of our economic situation as a least 
developed and landlocked country, and our proposed tariff 
rates are much lower than that of the other countries in the 
region.  At present, the Nepalese team is in Geneva 
negotiating with the working group.  We urge the US 
Government's support for our case.  Our commitment to trade 
liberalization is known to the US Government.  We are also 
committed to our plans.  We are ready to negotiate the 
specific issues raised by the US Government.  If there is US 
support, we are confident that we will be able to accede to 
the WTO this fall in Cancun.  There is good political 
commitment and a lot of preparations.  We are ready to use 
the offers of US technical assistance in various pieces of 
legislation and other capacity building matters. 
 
US demands for chemical harmonization and textile 
harmonization are commitments difficult to achieve under WTO 
negotiations.  In the services sector, we have opened many 
sectors, whereas an LDC can limit to three sectors only.  It 
would be difficult for us to give more concessions in 
agriculture, which is the mainstay of our economy.  But our 
agricultural tariff is already lower than others in the 
region. 
 
Nepal urges the USG to support our "fast track" entry that is 
envisaged for the LDCs.  We do not want to "miss the boat" 
now and wait for years of additional negotiating. 
 
Garment Bill:  Nepal has a strong case in favor of "duty free 
quota free access" of Nepalese ready-made garments to the US 
market.  We are basically very appreciative of the support 
the US Government agencies have given to our cause.  We are 
urging the Senator who had introduced the bill to pursue for 
approval.  We are ready to discuss and address the concerns 
expressed by the Senators and Congressmen on the Tibetan 
refugee issue and issue of Panda Energy's dispute with Nepal 
Electricity Authority. 
 
Tibetan Refugees:  We value the humanitarian concerns 
expressed in the US and elsewhere about the Tibetan refugees. 
 In view of the realization that the deportation of the 18 
Tibetans in May was an error, which provoked such an uproar 
and negative publicity for Nepal, His Majesty's Government of 
Nepal has pledged to continue its earlier policy and handed 
over another 19 Tibetans to UNHCR in July.  Thanks to the 
reaction, even the Chinese are now receptive to the idea that 
such a deportation, although rare and legally correct, could 
be politically damaging to both sides.  The Right Honorable 
Prime Minister himself has written to the US Senators and 
Congressmen and Congresswomen explaining Nepal's policy on 
refugees and committing not to repeat such cases.  This 
should solve the problem. 
 
Bhutanese Refugees:  We would also appreciate similar concern 
for the over 100,000 Bhutanese refugees languishing in seven 
camps in eastern Nepal since 1991.  We have taken positively 
the recent statement by the US Ambassador to Nepal, His 
Excellency Michael Malinowski, on the situation of Bhutanese 
refugees after the publication of the joint verification team 
results and after unilateral disclosure of the conditions of 
return by Bhutan.  There are concerns of the refugees and 
irregularities in the report of categorization, which need to 
be addressed during the ongoing process of appeals.  We would 
appreciate the USG's good offices to impress upon Bhutan to 
become a little more flexible.  In particular, they need to 
allow the UNHCR to conduct repatriation, allow the returnees 
to go back to their original land and property and not to 
transit camps, and to simplify the reapplication procedure 
after their return.  Other conditions also need to be made 
simpler and acceptable to the refugees so they could choose 
to return voluntarily. 
 
South Asia Regional Development:  The latest meeting of the 
SAARC Foreign Secretaries hosted by Nepal on July 9-10 was 
successful in clearing the agenda of the regional cooperation 
held due to the postponement of the Summit-level meeting. 
Agreeing to accelerate progress on major agenda items such as 
the South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) draft and agreeing to 
the next Summit dates, the Secretary-level meeting has 
contributed to a better confidence building and further 
normalization of relations between India and Pakistan.  We 
appreciate the US Government's constructive role of engaging 
the two countries.  From the current chair of SAARC, Nepal is 
playing a modest role to further enhance regional cooperation 
despite the kind of environment existing between the two 
archrivals.  Nepal held delegate-level bilateral talks with 
both the Foreign Secretaries after the SAARC meeting.  We 
have urged both that we want to see their relations improve. 
Though the Indian and Pakistan Foreign Secretaries did not 
meet bilaterally, they were very relaxed, informal and open 
during the discussion of the agenda items under SAARC. 
 
Other Matters:  His Majesty's Government is readying itself 
to notify the USG of the entry into force of the agreement 
signed last year between the two sides on the non-extradition 
of persons under Article 98 of the statue of the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). 
 
¶20.  (U) End Text. 
MALINOWSKI