This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 001192 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2013 
TAGS: TBIO PREL JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN REQUESTS SLIGHTLY LARGER QUANTITIES OF 
SMALLPOX AND ANTHRAX VACCINES, AND ASKS FOR THE PRICE 
 
REF: A. STATE 41006 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 1021 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request for the Department.  See 
paras 4-5 below. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GOJ WANTS VACCINES FOR CIVILIAN USE... 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S)  Following up on ref b demarches to the MFA and 
Jordan Armed Forces (JAF), Ambassador on February 23 called 
on Health Minister Walid Maani and reiterated the U.S. offer 
to provide -- on a reimbursable basis -- limited quantities 
of smallpox and anthrax vaccines to Jordan.  Prime Minister 
Ali Abul Ragheb called the Ambassador February 23 and noted 
that the GOJ would like to acquire 1,000 doses of smallpox 
vaccine and 3,000 doses of anthrax vaccine to for use for 
civilian health and emergency workers in the eastern regions 
of the country (nearest to the Iraqi border).  The PM said 
the GOJ would try to find the funds to pay for these 
purchases, and asked for the cost of the vaccines. 
 
------------------------------- 
...AND FOR THE MILITARY AS WELL 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S)  Concurrently, senior JAF officers indicated to the 
DATT that the JAF would like to get from the U.S. 9,000 doses 
of anthrax vaccine and 15,000 doses of smallpox vaccine.  The 
JAF asked for the cost of the vaccines before deciding if 
they would use ACSA or FMF to pay for the vaccines. 
 
-------------- 
ACTION REQUEST 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (S)  The GOJ has indicated to us that it would like 
access to a total of 12,000 doses of anthrax vaccine and 
16,000 doses of smallpox vaccine -- somewhat more than 
offered in ref a.  Embassy therefore requests that the 
Department consider increasing the amounts of anthrax and 
smallpox vaccines offered to Jordan to accommodate the 
requests for both civilian an military use (i.e. 12,000 doses 
of anthrax vaccine and 16,000 doses of smallpox vaccine). 
 
¶5.  (S)  In addition, the Embassy also requests that 
Washington provide separately the cost for the vaccines 
requested for civilian use and those requested for military 
use. 
GNEHM