This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR CA/VO/F/P, NEA, AND PRM FROM AMBASSADOR GNEHM 
DHS FOR OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, PAROLE, AND 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS PHUM JO IZ
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR SIGNIFICANT PUBLIC BENEFIT PAROLE 
 
REF: A. KUWAIT 1295 
     ¶B. KUWAIT 2781 
 
¶1. Name:  Rehaief, Hussein Oda (as written in English in 
passport: Hoseen A Rehaif) 
 
¶2. DPOB: 16 August 1974; Basra, Iraq (per passport) 
 
¶3. Justification:  Mr. Hussein Rehaief is the brother of 
Mohammed Rehaief, who rendered invaluable assistance to the 
United States Government during Operation Iraqi Freedom by 
assisting in the rescue of POW PFC Jessica Lynch.  Mohammed 
and his wife and daughter were paroled into the United States 
on April 10, 2003.  On or about April 30, men presumed to be 
members of the Baath Party came to the Rehaief family home 
and threatened remaining family members with bodily harm for 
the assistance Mohammed had provided to U.S. forces in the 
rescue of PFC Lynch.  In the Iraqi cultural context the 
threats were directed specifically towards the male members 
of the Rehaief family.  According to U.S. Air Force Special 
Agent Paul Gaubatz "the home which belonged to the (Rehaeif) 
family was attacked during the night of 9 June 03 with 
grenades and subsequently caught fire and (was) destroyed. 
Information obtained indicates it was directly due to their 
assistance to the U.S. government and U.S. armed forces.  It 
appears Baath Party and/or Fedayeen are attempting to locate 
the family." 
 
This threat to the Rehaief family has now come to focus on 
Hussein Rehaief, who has been residing in Amman, Jordan for 
the past 11 months.  (Had Hussein been in Iraq at the time 
his brother and extended family were removed by U.S. forces, 
he certainly would have been removed as well.)  According to 
statements made to the Consul and RSO, Hussein Rehaief has 
been threatened twice by persons claiming to seek revenge for 
his family,s support for the US in Iraq; on one occasion, he 
says he was surrounded by a group of eight Iraqi men and 
struck in the back with a knife (we have seen the healing 
wound).  Based on past incidents where Iraqi agents or 
sympathizers have demonstrated an ability to act in Jordan, 
Mission believes that Hussein Rehaief is an attractive target 
for Saddam supporters who would welcome the chance to hit 
back at a publicly-known supporter of the U.S.  Further, 
Mission has been informed that a major U.S. news network is 
planning a lengthy report on Mohammed Rehaief,s efforts 
vis-a-vis PFC Lynch, and that a book is to come out this 
autumn as well.  Both of these events will  heighten the 
profile of Mr. Rehaief in Amman, increasing his value as a 
target for Iraqi oppositionists.  In post,s view, there is a 
near certainty that Hussein Rehaief will be in "imminent 
danger" within the coming two months; after considering all 
factors, we believe it is preferable to grant him SPB Parole 
now, before he faces even greater risk of harm and further 
attack.  We note as the humanitarian benefit of reuniting 
Hussein Rehaief, unmarried and unable to work in Jordan, with 
the majority of his extended family now residing in the U.S. 
 
We note further that refugee processing is not presently 
available to Mr. Rehaief as an alternate means to rejoin his 
family and escape danger.  When Mr. Rehaief registered with 
the Amman UNHCR office this summer, he was granted "temporary 
protection" only, as UNHCR has stopped interviewing Iraqis as 
refugees pending further evaluation of the political 
situation in Iraq.  Further, post,s refugee processing unit 
confirms that DHS is not presently interviewing Iraqi 
refugees who have already been forwarded to us by UNHCR -- we 
have a backlog of over 170 Iraqi persons who have been 
waiting DHS adjudication since late last year. 
 
Mission urges Washington agencies to concur with granting 
Special Public Benefit Parole to Hussein Rehaief. 
 
¶4.  Addresses:  Mr. Rehaief presently resides in a 
residential district of Amman, Jordan.  His father, brother 
and extended family members are, to the best of his 
knowledge, residing in Washington, D.C. 
 
¶5.  Namecheck:  Post has conducted a CLASS namecheck on Mr. 
Rehaief.  No hits were returned. 
 
¶6.  Means of support:  Mr. Rehaief,s extended family in the 
U.S. would provide financial support to him upon arrival 
(they are currently sending him money in Amman).  The 
Livingston Group, which financially assisted his family 
members upon their arrival in the U.S., may also provide 
support for Hussein Rehaief. 
 
¶7.  Office supporting request:  The Ambassador,s Office and 
Regional Security Office fully supports this SPB Parole 
request. 
 
¶8.  Date of travel and itinerary:  Mr. Rehaief would depart 
Amman as soon as SPB Parole is granted.  The most direct 
route would be via the Royal Jordanian non-stop flight to New 
York, which would preclude Mr. Rehaief having to deal with 
immigration officials at intermediate stops. 
¶9.  Accompanying family members:  none 
¶10. Certification by the Chief of Mission: 
 
"I, Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm, U.S. Embassy Amman, U.S. 
Department of State, attest to the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
of State for Visa Services and the INS Office of 
International Affairs, Parole Unit, that: 
 
-- i. The justification and information pertinent to the 
parole request are accurate and complete, insofar as 
information is available to this post. 
 
-- ii.  Namechecks have been completed in the CLASS database 
on the person named in the request and, as appropriate, 
information obtained from foreign law enforcement agencies. 
 
-- iii.  All database findings on the person named above, 
including copies of computer screens and other related 
materials have been identified and forwarded to the INS 
Office of International Affairs, PHAB, fax 202/514-0542. 
 
-- iv.  The following is a complete list of all Department 
offices and USG agencies known or thought by post to have an 
interest in this request:  Department of Defense; Bureau Near 
Eastern Affairs, Department of State; Bureau of Consular 
Affairs, Department of State; Bureau of Population, Refugees 
and Migration, Department of State. 
 
(signed) Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm; 30 September 2003 
 
GNEHM