This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER TU ADANA
SUBJECT:  NEWROZ CELEBRATIONS IN SE TURKEY 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Newroz (Turkish spelling "Nevruz") 
falls on Friday, March 21.  This spring festival 
is the most important holiday for Kurds, and 
since the 1990s has become increasingly linked to 
Kurdish political aspirations.  Our contacts in 
the region predict large public celebrations will 
take place.  While our contacts in both the 
Kurdish community and the GOT emphasize they want 
the celebrations to remain peaceful and lawful, 
the imminence of war in Iraq could spark trouble. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  DEHAP officials in Adana have applied 
to the provincial governor and security director 
for permission to hold Newroz celebrations.  As 
of yesterday, no answer has been received.  DEHAP 
says it is in control of its rank-and-file and 
has warned against responding to "provocations". 
They expect a crowd of up to 100,000 people in 
Adana for a celebration to be held at a large 
vacant lot off a main thoroughfare in Adana. 
(Note:  Last year's Newroz celebration in Adana 
drew approximately 50,000 people.  End note.) 
The Security Directorate for Adana told us he did 
not anticipate any violence. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Similarly, DEHAP in Diyarbakir is also 
expecting a response from GOT provincial 
officials to a request to hold Newroz festivities 
there.   Timing is important, because, according 
to the law, such permission has to be obtained 48 
hours in advance.  Last year, Newroz was 
celebrated by more than 300,000 people at a 
fairground some 15-km outside Diyarbakir on the 
way to Elazig.  This year, DEHAP has requested to 
use open land in the Huzurevleri neighborhood of 
Diyarbakir municipality. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)   Newroz could not be coming at a more 
sensitive time, given the imminence of war.  Both 
Kurdish and GOT interlocutors are pledging a non- 
confrontational approach.  That said, the 
potential is there for things to spin out of 
control.  It should be recalled that the Newroz 
holiday - celebrated by Kurds everywhere - is not 
only a spring festival but also part of the 
Kurdish people's foundation mythology, 
celebrating a successful rebellion against an 
ancient evil tyrant named Dahhak. 
HOLTZ