This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002987 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL IZ NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH CABINET APPROVES SFIR EXTENSION; 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE WEEK OF DEC 8 
 
REF:  THE HAGUE 2911(NOTAL) 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Dutch Cabinet decided on November 28 to extend 
Dutch participation in the Stabilization Force in Iraq 
(SFIR) by six months to end in July 2004.  The Dutch 
currently have approximately 1100 personnel (mostly Dutch 
Royal Marines) serving as part of the UK's Multi-national 
Division Southeast in Al Muthanna province.  In order to 
enhance the troops' safety, a reconnaissance unit of 70 
Dutch Army Special Forces commandoes will also be sent to 
Iraq.  The Dutch contribution will be maintained at about 
1,125 troops.  The Cabinet also decided to send a fourth 
Chinook helicopter to enhance the mobility of Dutch forces. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Cabinet's action constitutes a "formal 
decision," however in the Dutch consensus-based system, the 
matter will have to be debated by Parliament (currently 
expected for the week of December 8).  While unlike in 
Germany, formal parliamentary approval for military 
deployments is not necessary, a Dutch government would be 
unlikely to proceed if confronted with widespread opposition 
(Comment:  While parliamentary discussion of this issue will 
likely be noisy, including potential demands for additional 
force protection measures beyond the commandoes, all 
parties, except the left-wing Socialists and Green Left are 
expected to support the proposed extension.  End comment.) 
 
¶3. (U) At his weekly press conference after the Cabinet 
meeting, PM Balkenende stressed that the international 
community should not turn its back on Iraq even as it also 
must keep a close watch on the security risks.  In a letter 
to parliament, FM de Hoop Scheffer and Defense Minister Kamp 
pointed out the Dutch detachment helps to establish security 
and stability in Al Muthanna and creates the right 
conditions for the political and economic reconstruction 
process in this part of Iraq.  The letter assets that good 
progress has been made, but the troops' continued presence 
is required to reinforce and strengthen security and 
stability.  It also notes that the Dutch detachment carries 
out patrols together with the Iraqis, trains Iraqi police 
and supports the local new political structures, thus 
facilitating an early transfer of power to the Iraqi people. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Following attacks on other coalition members 
including the Italians at Nasiriyah, some Dutch MPs have 
expressed strong concerns as to whether the GONL is taking 
adequate measures to protect Dutch personnel.  The Cabinet's 
decision to send the commandoes has met with wide approval. 
Some questions have been raised as to whether there has been 
sufficient information sharing on security threats among 
coalition partners, and if Dutch assets such as maritime 
patrol aircraft should be deployed.  Defense Minister Kamp 
has rejected this stating, "the GONL is convinced that the 
Coalition will share information that is relevant to the 
Netherlands.  Thus far, any request by the Dutch battalion 
commander for air reconnaissance has been met," and that 
"intensive" talks have again been conducted with the UK 
about "intensification of the exchange of reconnaissance 
information and intelligence on the local security 
situation, the border area with Saudi Arabia in particular, 
between the Dutch detachment and the British Division HQ in 
Basra." 
 
Sobel