This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 000690 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
INL FOR PAUL SIMONS, S/CT FOR COFER BLACK, DS FOR FRANK 
TAYLOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: ASSISTANCE FOR CIVIL DISORDER MANAGEMENT 
(CDM) 
 
¶1. (SBU) I am requesting your support for Civil Disorder 
Management (CDM) training for Yemen.  There are at least 
three salient considerations: 
 
--  Yemeni efforts against Al-Qa'ida elements, especially 
over the last eight months, have been sustained and 
increasingly successful. 
--  Despite President Salih's differences with us over Iraq 
and the troubled regional climate, Salih has shown steady 
resolve to protect American personnel and facitilies. 
--  When push came to shove during the March 21 violent 
demonstration heading toward the Embassy, Salih and Yemeni 
security forces gave no sign of flinching, even when lethal 
force had to be used. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) With my encouragement, staff here have been in 
touch informally with INL and S/CT regarding training 
possibilities.  Not surprisingly, FY-03 training budgets are 
already earmarked, and indeed we are told FY-04 plans are 
well advanced.  Sometimes plans fall through, however, and 
countries are unable to participate in training programs 
already approved.  Against that contingency, I would like to 
express my strong support, as soon as possible, for a Civil 
Disorder Management (CDM) Program for Yemen. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Such an INL-funded program would provide essential 
in-country training for Central Security Organization 
commanders, and follow-up training and essential equipment 
for Central Security Organization (CSO -- the Ministry of 
Interior's internal security body) cadres.  The violent March 
21 demonstration showed clear need, and I cannot think of a 
more appropriate response to the ROYG's efforts to ensure the 
safety of this mission during the recent violence.  I am told 
that training and equipment for about 150-175 personnel could 
be done for an estimated $350,000. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) I recommend such a program be funded as early as 
possible.  Informally, we have been in touch with senior 
working levels at the MOI, who indicate strong interest in 
training possiblities; if/if opportunities materialize,  On 
that basis, Embassy would engage with the Minister of 
Interior on necessary agreements to cover this activity 
should a way forward be found for CDM for Yemen. 
 
 
MISENHEIMER