This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  CIVIL SOCIETY AND INTERNATIONAL MISSIONS 
CONDEMN MAOISTS' RETURN TO VIOLENCE 
 
REF: KATHMANDU 1648 
 
Summary 
======== 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On August 28 and 29, Nepal's civil society and 
international missions issued strong statements condemning 
the Maoists' withdrawal from peace talks.  An umbrella school 
association organized the largest rally in recent memory to 
encourage both sides to return to the negotiating table.  The 
rally, with a far more significant turnout than that managed 
by the parties in the past four months of constant protests, 
indicates the true desire of Nepalese for peace.  End summary. 
 
Civil Society Makes Their Voices Heard 
======================================= 
 
¶2.  (U) After overcoming the initial shock of the Maoists 
return to hostilities, civil society responded August 28 and 
29 with strong statements condemning the Maoists and urging 
them to return to the negotiating table.  A demonstration 
organized by the Private and Boarding Schools' Organization 
of Nepal gathered 30,000-plus people in Kathmandu in a rally 
for peace.  Joining the rally were members of the Federation 
of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, the Nepal 
Chamber of Commerce, Hotel Association of Nepal, Trekking 
Association of Nepal, Mountaineering Association of Nepal, 
and the Nepal Scouts.  This rally is the largest in Kathmandu 
in recent memory and was carried off peacefully. 
 
¶3.  (U) In press interviews, women in Dang, one of the sites 
of the last round of negotiations, called for the Maoist 
leadership to reconsider returning to violence.    The 
President of the Tharu Women's Forum urged the Government and 
Maoists to return to the table, fearing that Tharu children 
will be caught in the crossfire.  (Note: the Tharus are an 
ethnic group the Maoist claim to champion.  End note.)  In 
light of the effect renewed hostilities will have on tourism, 
the Presidents of the Airline Operators Association of Nepal, 
the Hotel Association of Nepal, Nepal Association of Travel 
Agents, and the Nepal Mountaineering Association bemoaned the 
break in the cease-fire and requested the Maoists and the 
Government to return to the peace process. 
 
Parties Condemn the Break 
========================== 
 
¶4.  (U) Communist Party of Nepal-United Marxist Leninist 
(UML) Central Committee member Bam Dev Gautum declared on 
August 28 that "even before the formal declaration, the 
Maoists had already broken the code of conduct."  He believes 
that the Maoists made a mistake in breaking the cease-fire. 
Nepali Congress Party leader Ram Chadra Poudel condemned the 
Maoists' unilateral withdrawal from the peace process and 
expressed concern over the deteriorating situation. 
 
International Outcry 
===================== 
 
¶5.  (U) On August 28, several diplomatic missions issued 
statements appealing for the rebels to reconsider their 
return to violence (U.S. Embassy statement on August 28 at 
reftel): 
-- The Indian Ministry of External Affairs called any 
resumption of armed hostilities unfortunate and said it would 
constitute a setback in efforts for peace and stability in 
Nepal. 
-- The Chinese Embassy offered its sincere "hopes that the 
concerned parties in Nepal can hold national and people's 
interests above all, put aside differences, and resume the 
peace process to bring a durable peace to Nepal at the 
earliest." 
-- The European Union Chief of Mission requested the Maoists 
to reconsider their decision, renounce all acts of terrorism, 
and return to the negotiating table without delay. 
-- The Japanese Embassy labeled the Maoist withdrawal from 
peace talks "regrettable" and urged all groups concerned with 
the welfare of the Nepalese to work together for a peaceful 
resolution based on the principle of democracy. 
Comment 
¶6.  (SBU) The rally and public protests against the Maoists' 
withdrawal from peace talks and recent attacks are the 
largest, most spontaneous and vocal reaction by Nepalese 
civil society in the past year of political crises.  The 
rally is the first broad-based, non-partisan  expression of 
public desire for peace.  This demonstration underscores the 
enormous desire among the Nepali people, and thus belies 
Maoist claims of widespread popular sympathy for their 
struggle. 
MALINOWSKI