This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

052018Z Sep 03UNCLAS MONTREAL 001222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
SENSITIVE FOR DS/ICI/PII, OTTAWA FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: POTENTIAL THREAT TO POTUS, SECSTATE AND SECDEF 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Sensitive but unclassified, please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On September 4, 2003, the RCMP in Montreal notified 
the RSO's Office that during the month of August, a subject 
identified as Eric FOREST, a Canadian citizen, DOB: 
04/30/1976, indicated to the RCMP that he would travel to 
Washington, D.C. to judge President Bush, Secretary of State 
Powell and Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld for a "September 
11th conspiracy."  Although FOREST indicated he would cause 
the three no harm, he also indicated that he was "Jesus 
Christ" and that as such, he would be judging them. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) FOREST later called the RCMP and indicated that 
President Bush had been arrested and that he had to travel to 
Washington to judge the President. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On August 31st, the RCMP contacted the Montreal 
Police Department which arrested FOREST on a previously 
issued warrant.  During the arrest procedure, it was decided 
that FOREST would be referred to psychiatric hospitals for 
evaluation, however, because of Canada's privacy laws, it is 
now unclear as to whether or not FOREST is still under 
psychiatric observation in Montreal, or if he has been 
released. 
 
¶5.  (U) The POC for this matter is RSO Michael H. Nelson, 
AmConGen Montreal, (514) 398-0731. 
ALLEN