This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001966 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR D, SA, SA/INS, EUR/NB; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:     DECL: 11-14-13 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CE NO LTTE
SUBJECT:  Plans by Norwegian Deputy FM Helgesen to call 
the Deputy Secretary 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1963, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (SBU) After concluding his November 14 briefing on 
his latest visit to Sri Lanka (see Septel), Norwegian 
Deputy Foreign Minister Vidar Helgesen took Ambassador 
Lunstead aside and said he thought it might be useful to 
call Deputy Secretary Armitage at some point next week. 
Helgesen indicated that he would like to apprise the 
Deputy Secretary of the situation in Sri Lanka and 
Norway's ideas on next steps.  The Ambassador said he 
would convey this information to Washington. 
 
¶2.  (C) COMMENT:  As reviewed in Septel, Helgesen and 
his Norwegian government facilitation team had quite an 
eventful visit, including meetings with Tamil Tiger 
leader V. Prabhakaran, and cohabitation arch-rivals 
President Kumaratunga and Prime Minister Wickremesinghe. 
Given the sensitive situation prevailing in Sri Lanka in 
the aftermath of the President's sudden moves last week, 
we think a D-Helgesen phone call would be an excellent 
idea in light of the key role Norway is playing in this 
particularly turbulent period.  END COMMENT. 
 
LUNSTEAD