This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 002041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/PD-LSCHWARTZ/LFSCENSNY; 
ECA/PE/C/CU-JMERANTE; SA/PPD-SHUDSON- 
DEAN/KWAINSCOTT/JDAVIES; SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP SCUL CE OEXC
SUBJECT:  POST EVALUATION ON CLASSICAL PIANISTS PROGRAM 
 
REF: (A) Wainscott-Lohof email, 11/25/03; (B) State 33066 
 
¶1. Headline: COLOMBO BRINGS AMERICAN CLASSICAL PIANIST TO 
SRI LANKA 
 
¶2. The enduring value of performing arts programs was 
illustrated once again when the American Pianists 
Association, Embassy Colombo, and ECA brought Michael 
Sheppard, a gifted, young American classical pianist to 
Sri Lanka.  While in the country Sheppard appeared on MTV 
(independent telecaster, islandwide penetration) and 
performed in concert with the Symphony Orchestra of Sri 
Lanka.  He also gave two by-invitation-only concerts:  in 
Kandy his performance was co-hosted with the Mayor and the 
Municipal Council; in Colombo his concert at the Residence 
was the focus of Ambassador Lunstead's social debut. 
Additionally, Sheppard and the APA's artistic director, 
Joel Harrison, conducted master classes in Colombo, Galle, 
and Kandy. 
 
¶3. September 22-October 1, 2003, Fourth Quarter 
 
¶4. Justification and Objective:  Here, as in many other 
places around the world, classical music enjoys the 
patronage of Sri Lanka's most influential citizens.  In a 
bilateral conversation that is inevitably driven by the 
nuts and bolts of policy, Sheppard's appearances brought 
boost and dimension to our message.  The U.S. is not just 
a world power, Sheppard's music illustrated.  It's also a 
civilization.  Clearly, the Department should be 
sponsoring more -- not fewer -- programs like this. 
LUNSTEAD