This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO IZ HO PA
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, JUNE 23, 2003 
 
 
Â¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" 
on 6/23 entitled "Chandelier". "President Bush is trying to 
reconfigure the U.S.'s alliances with its southern 
neighbors. Bush visited Europe to reunite with his 
colleagues from the G-8; tensions decreased between France 
and Germany, yet it seems Bush and Chirac do not have enough 
chemistry. A few weeks later the European Union, imposed 
sanctions on Cuba because of this country's political 
opposition, in a move that some have interpreted as an 
action to get closer to Washington." 
 
"The U.S. and Brazil are enhancing their bilateral 
relationship, and to prove that, President Bush agreed to 
aid President Lula in his `Zero Hunger Project'. Although, 
the Brazilian press has noted that Lula has slighted his 
deal because Bush did not compromise to the Brazilian 
aspiration to become a member of the U.N. Security Council. 
Chile has already signed a FTA with the U.S. Even though 
some Central American countries are part of the `coalition' 
and are sending troops to aid in Iraq's reconstruction, they 
still cannot sign a CAFTA agreement because the Central 
American countries have not yet agreed on a common 
proposal." 
 
 
Palmer