This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KUWAIT 002789 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID/W 
STATE PLEASE REPEAT TO IO COLLECTIVE 
STATE FOR PRM/ANE, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, IO AND SA/PAB 
NSC FOR EABRAMS, SMCCORMICK, STAHIR-KHELI, JDWORKEN 
USAID FOR USAID/A, DCHA/AA, DCHA/RMT, DCHA/FFP 
USAID FOR DCHA/OTI, DCHA/DG, ANE/AA 
USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA:WGARVELINK, BMCCONNELL, KFARNSWORTH 
USAID FOR ANE/AA:WCHAMBERLIN 
ROME FOR FODAG 
GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH 
ANKARA FOR AMB WRPEARSON, ECON AJSIROTIC AND DART 
AMMAN FOR USAID AND DART 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF IZ WFP
SUBJECT:  DART FOOD UPDATE IN THE NORTH 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.   Nearly 400 WFP-contracted trucks from Syria with 
approximately 16,000 metric tons (MT) of bulk wheat grain 
have arrived at the Kirkuk silo complex since 12 June.  WFP 
expects to be able soon to offload 6,000 MT per day at the 
Kirkuk silo.  Food distributions are proceeding apace in 
Kirkuk and Mosul.  Local purchase of the wheat harvest has 
not yet begun in earnest because silos in the Kirkuk area 
are apparently still not ready to receive wheat.  Food 
distributions are continuing without major problems in As 
Sulaymaniyah governorate, with May's wheat flour 
distribution approximately 65 percent complete.  WFP wants 
to incorporate vulnerability assessments into its monthly 
monitoring activities in the three northern governorates. 
As Sulaymaniyah farmers continue to harvest a bumper wheat 
crop, but are pessimistic about other marketing 
possibilities in Iran.  Populations in the former Ansar al- 
Islam areas are pleased that radical elements have departed, 
although residents are concerned about housing, employment, 
and food distributions.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Bulk Wheat Grain Arrives in Kirkuk 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.   DART Team North food officer traveled to Kirkuk on 14 
June and found the World Food Program (WFP) receiving a 
portion of 135,000 MT of bulk wheat grain.  The 135,000 MT 
of wheat grain will be stored at the main Kirkuk silo 
complex, which is being guarded by Coalition forces. 
Approximately 20,000 MT has been offloaded and WFP- 
contracted trucks from Syria are waiting outside the silo 
for their turn to empty their load.  An estimated 390 
trucks, with approximately 16,000 MT of wheat grain have 
arrived since 12 June.  The silo has been unable to receive 
this quantity of wheat grain in a timely manner.  On 12 
June, WFP was able to offload 3,250 MT during the hours the 
silo was operating. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Vacuvators to Increase the Speed of Grain Offloading 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.   WFP recently airlifted four new vacuvators from Belgium 
and one additional vacuvator is expected soon for the Kirkuk 
silo.  The five vacuvators are expected to triple the 
offload capacity of the silo, but so far have not performed 
to this level.  The vacuvators' performance is improving 
daily as the technician who accompanied the four vacuvators 
works to increase their off-take.  WFP has not paid for the 
vacuvators, and payment is contingent on them operating as 
per the performance specifications.  WFP expects that by 
getting the vacuvators to work more efficiently, and by 
leasing other equipment, it can increase offload capacity to 
6,000 MT per day.  WFP has provided USD 5,000 for repairs to 
the silo and for a new generator. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Public Distribution System Status for Kirkuk and Mosul 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4.   The Public Distribution System (PDS) is continuing 
apace, with Kirkuk having completed distributions for 
approximately 40 percent of wheat flour and other ration 
commodities except rice, which is just starting to be 
distributed.  Mosul has distributed approximately 50 percent 
of wheat flour, 25 percent of other ration commodities, and 
is also just beginning the rice distributions.  In a move to 
begin shifting responsibility for the PDS back to the 
Ministry of Trade (MOT), WFP in Kirkuk has signed over 
responsibility of all ration commodities to the MOT, and is 
now implementing only primary transport, offloading, and 
monitoring.  WFP and the MOT sign the waybills for receipt 
at the silo or warehouse, and MOT is then responsible for 
coordinating food agents' transport and distributions. 
However, WFP remains ultimately accountable to its donors 
for ensuring that the commodities are distributed properly. 
Hence, WFP maintains its monitoring function. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Central versus Governorate MOT Responsibilities 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.   WFP is getting along with the Kirkuk MOT but not so 
well with the Mosul MOT, which is in direct contrast from 
the situation several weeks ago.  WFP has still not been 
able to sign over commodity responsibilities for wheat flour 
and bulk wheat to the MOT in Mosul, due to the lack of clear 
and timely instructions received from the Central MOT in 
Baghdad.  The MOT's departmental capacities at the 
governorate level vary widely as to how much responsibility 
the governorates are prepared to take on without continually 
expecting Baghdad to provide guidance.  The MOT in Mosul 
seems to be especially dependent on Baghdad for guidance. 
WFP does expect the official handover to be complete in 
Mosul and Tikrit within the coming days, even though WFP 
international staff is prevented from going to Tikrit due to 
continued security restrictions.  DART Team North food 
officer reports, however, that the WFP national staff in 
Tikrit is doing a very efficient job. 
 
--------------------------- 
Local Purchase Preparations 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6.   DART Team North food officer recently visited the 
Riyadh silo, located approximately 40 kilometers southwest 
of Kirkuk, near the town of Al Hawijah.  There is no actual 
silo, but rather 30 open bins with a large holding capacity 
of more than 100,000 MT.  Two bins are filled with last 
year's wheat harvest.  Coalition forces are guarding the 
silo compound.  Farmers have been asking silo staff when 
they will be able to deliver their harvested wheat. 
However, the weighing scales, laboratory testing equipment, 
and office furniture were stolen and have not yet been 
replaced.  The main constraint to starting the delivery of 
wheat to the silo is the missing scales.  Staff at the silo 
complex was unaware when this equipment will be replaced, 
whether the USD 50,000 from the Office of the Coalition 
Provisional Authority (OCPA) for the use by the MOT to make 
preparations for the wheat harvest had been received or if 
the MOT funds can provide for replacement of the scales, 
laboratory equipment, and office furniture. (Note: DART Team 
North reports that it is not aware of the USD 50,000 
payments being received by any MOT office in the northern 
governorates.  End Note.)  When farmers may be able to 
deliver their harvest to this reception site is still 
uncertain.  DART Team North Food Officer expects to assess 
whether other silo complexes in At Tamim governorate may be 
better prepared to receive the local wheat harvest. 
 
¶7.   The local guard at the silo complex was concerned that 
other silo employees had received the USD 20 payment and the 
subsequent USD 30 emergency payments, but he had received 
nothing.  As guards were apparently not listed on the former 
regime's payrolls, they did not receive payments.  DART Team 
North reports it has heard this concern time and again from 
security guards.  (Comment:  This non-payment issue is 
ironic because the silo guards seem to be the only warehouse 
and silo employees who continually report for a full 
workday.  End Comment.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
As Sulaymaniyah PDS Distributions and Assessments 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8.   DART Team North Food Officer traveled to As 
Sulaymaniyah governorate on 10-11 June, and visited 
locations including Chwarta, Penjwin, Halabja and the former 
Ansar al-Islam areas of Biara and Tewalla.  The head of 
WFP's sub-office in As Sulaymaniyah reported that PDS 
distributions were proceeding efficiently, and that May's 
wheat flour distributions were approximately 65 percent 
complete.  Other food ration commodities are delayed pending 
secondary transport contracted by the local authorities and 
paid for by the food agents.  Once the wheat flour 
distribution is nearly complete, transport availability will 
increase, and the additional food ration commodities can be 
distributed within a short period. 
 
¶9.   The head of WFP's sub-office in As Sulaymaniyah stated 
that WFP staff in the three northern governorates wants to 
begin to incorporate detailed vulnerability assessments into 
its monthly monitoring.  The assessments will determine 
where needs may continue after the PDS ends, and if in fact 
there are still critical needs to be met.  DART Team North 
supports WFP's interest in conducting vulnerability 
assessments.  These assessments provide an excellent 
opportunity for WFP to begin looking at future needs while 
still having a large experienced team in place already 
monitoring needs on a regular basis. 
----------------------- 
Chwarta/Penjwin/Halabja 
----------------------- 
 
¶10.  According to the DART Team North food officer, farmers 
and other beneficiaries in the eastern As Sulaymaniyah 
governorate towns of Chwarta, Penjwin, and Halabjah reported 
that they had received only wheat flour from WFP since 
March.  Some but not all farmers were aware of the $105 per 
MT wheat offer for this year's harvest.  A significant 
number of farmers stated that they would not sell their 
wheat for this price, given the high costs for harvesting 
the grain and transporting it (up to 200 kilometers) for 
sale in Kirkuk, the nearest sanctioned reception site.  A 
number of farmers reported that any wheat available above 
the level necessary to feed their families would become 
fodder for their livestock.  Penjwin is located on the 
Iranian border, but local farmers reported that there is 
very little cross-border trading for selling their wheat 
inside Iran. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Former Ansar Areas: Biara/Tewella 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Ansar al-Islam was a radical Islamic group that 
controlled a number of villages on the Iranian border, 
including the towns of Biara and Tewella.  These areas were 
isolated from the rest of Kurdistan, so visitors and traders 
were not able to easily access the area, but WFP commodities 
were regularly permitted entry.  DART Team North food 
officer reports that there appears to be very little 
commercial or other business activity in these areas. 
Locals stated that trade with Iran is nearly non-existent, 
although many homes in the border town of Tewella did have 
satellite dishes.  According to residents, Ansar al-Islam 
had Turkish, Bangladeshi, Afghani, Syrian, and Palestinian 
elements, including Kurds, until they were recently forcibly 
evicted.  Being isolated from the remainder of Iraqi 
Kurdistan, the Islamic authorities had reportedly banned 
alcohol, music, and satellite TV, except apparently for the 
Al Jazeera channel.  Even smoking and participating in 
sports were forbidden.  Most of the Ansar group were said to 
have now fled into Iran, only meters from Tewella town. 
 
¶12.  Tewella residents expressed concern that food 
commodities were delayed due to the need to contract "PUK" 
vehicles.  As stated above, secondary transport is 
contracted by the local authorities on behalf of the food 
agents, and therefore is often seen as PUK-friendly 
transporters.  DART Team North will assess whether the need 
to contract PUK vehicles is indeed causing transport delays. 
Approximately 200 families from Biara are currently living 
in tents outside the town due to the recent fighting that 
destroyed their homes. 
 
¶13.  WFP staff also noted that even in the former Ansar al- 
Islam areas of control, WFP was always able to deliver food 
through local transporters, though WFP staff was unable to 
monitor distributions.  The PKK, the Turkish Kurd rebel 
group, has some supporters in the far northern governorate 
of As Sulaymaniyah, and the area remains a dangerous place. 
The WFP staff is still unable to access deep into these 
areas for monitoring purposes, although deliveries do 
continue. 
 
JONES