This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002293 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR A/S FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS ARCOS 
DEPT. FOR INL AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP PREL SNAR PTER PHUM SMIG HO
SUBJECT:  REQUEST INVITATION FOR HONDURAN MINISTER OF PUBLIC 
SECURITY ALVAREZ TO MEET WITH DHS SECRETARY RIDGE 
 
Ref: Arcos-Palmieri/Parks-Banda emails (various) 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  Please see para. 5. 
 
 
¶2.  During a recent visit to Honduras, prior to assuming 
office, DHS Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, 
Cresencio Arcos was very favorably impressed by the counter 
terrorism and anti-alien smuggling efforts being undertaken 
by Honduran law enforcement authorities.  Post believes it 
would be very beneficial to United States national security 
interests in this region to highlight contributions of one 
of our Central American partners to the war on terrorism. 
Given the deployment of Honduran troops in Iraq in support 
of coalition efforts to rebuild that country and the 
excellent level of bilateral cooperation with the Honduran 
government, we request that Honduran Minister of Public 
Security, Oscar Arturo Alvarez, visit Washington, DC, from 
October 21-25 to meet with DHS Secretary Ridge and other DHS 
and State officials to discuss programs and review counter 
terrorism efforts in Honduras. 
 
 
¶3.  Per ref e-mails, Post asks DHS assistance in arranging 
meetings with Assistant Secretary Arcos, Commissioner Bonner 
of Border Patrol, Chief of U.S. Border Patrol Gustavo De La 
Vina, and others regarding law enforcement issues in 
Honduras and to discuss successful joint operations as well 
as future joint participation in the 
 
 
 
 
 
areas of port security, illegal arms transfers, alien 
smuggling, trafficking in persons, counter terrorism as well 
as counter narcotics operations. Post will arrange meetings 
with State Department offices separately. 
 
¶4.  Post is prepared to cover cost of travel for the 
Minister, including airfare, lodging and per diem.  Per ref 
e-mails, we understand that DHS recommends an Embassy escort 
accompany the Minister.  The process for Minister of 
Security Alvarez to request official permission to travel 
from the government requires some lead time. 
 
¶5. Action request: Post respectfully requests that a formal 
DHS invitation for Honduran Minister of Public Security 
Alvarez to meet with DHS Secretary Ridge be extended no 
later than October 5. 
 
PALMER