This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0133 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          MAY 9, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for May 9, 2003.  Please note that Turkish press 
reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2.  Bolge/Turkiye: The US troops' dependents 
evacuated from Incirlik AFB for security reasons 
prior to the war on Iraq started returning to the 
AFB. The soldiers had been separated from their 
families since March 17. 1,300 dependant-families 
were evacuated from the AFB. The first group of 
evacuees returned Incirlik AFB yesterday. 
 
 
¶3.  Turkiye: The police teams launching an 
operation in Kahramanmars arrested nine persons 
for alleged membership in the PKK. It is alleged 
that six of the suspects had taken military 
training at PKK's camp at the Iranian border and 
were wanted by the Security Directorate of 
Istanbul. The other three persons were charged 
with having sympathy for and written banners on 
behalf of PKK. 
 
 
¶4.  Milliyet: It is alleged that one of two 
persons, detained by police in Bingol for 
instigating the demonstration in front of the 
governor's office after the earthquake, was a 
Hizbullah member, and the other one had bonds 
with the PKK. The report prepared by police about 
the demonstration in Bingol claimed a group of 
approximately 1,500 people, including 
instigators, tried to attack Governor Huseyin 
Avni Cos, and the Special Operation Team- 
affiliated policemen opened fire in the air to 
disperse the crowd. The report claimed that the 
crowd was agitated by instigators including some 
DEHAP supporters. Twelve persons were arrested by 
police on the charges of involvement in 
demonstrations. While the court released ten of 
the detainees, two were held in custody for 
membership in illegal organizations. 
HOLTZ