This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2013 
TAGS: PREL EWWT TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY FORBIDS ENTRY OF GREEK CYPRIOT SHIPS INTO 
TURKISH PORTS 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador W. Robert Pearson, Reason 1.5 (b,d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) MFA Director for Bilateral Political Affairs Ahmet 
Banguoglu called DCM February 25 regarding Greek 
Cypriot-flagged ships delivering U.S. military equipment 
and/or supplies to a Turkish port.  Banguoglu said he had 
been instructed to inform the embassy that, without 
exception, Greek Cypriot owned, flagged, or registered ships 
were not and would not be allowed to enter Turkish ports. 
Banguoglu noted that the Turkish government was "unhappy" 
that the U.S. had been so insensitive as to load equipment 
bound for Turkey on Cypriot-flagged vessels. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Banguoglu said the Dutch had also raised the 
possibility of delivery of the Patriot Weapon Systems to 
Turkey on Greek Cypriot-flagged ships.  After the GOT had 
informed them that use of these ships was not possible, the 
Dutch had found other means of delivery.  DCM noted that the 
U.S. understood that at least one Greek Cypriot-flagged ship 
had entered port in Istanbul in 2002.  Banguoglu responded 
that no such incident had taken place; even if it had, it was 
an accident, could not be a precedent, and would not be 
repeated. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ambassador also raised the issue with MFA U/S Ziyal, 
who confirmed GOT policy.  Mission believes this is the final 
word on this issue. 
PEARSON