This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          SEPTEMBER 12, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for September 12, 2003.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Zaman, Sabah Guney, / Two hundred and ten 
people in Adana applied to Turkish authorities 
to benefit from the "reintegration" law. Fifty- 
five of these people are members of PKK/KADEK, 
117 of them are members of Hizbullah and 38 of 
them are from other illegal terrorist 
organizations. 
 
 
¶3. Zaman / Merchants in Incirlik village wore 
black ribbons all day yesterday to show their 
respect for the lost lives in the September 11, 
2001 attacks.  Merchants also stated that they 
share the grief of the U.S Government and the 
American people. 
 
 
¶4. Turkiye / The Turkish Government is planning to 
open the Ovakoy border gate between Syria and 
Silopi, Sirnak province.  Turkish officials 
reportedly discussed this plan with American 
officials.  The plan includes canceling all the 
trade at Habur border gate, which is now under 
the control of Kurdish peshmerges, and using 
Ovakoy gate for trade instead. If the plan is 
accepted the Habur gate will only be used for 
the transport of humanitarian aid and the 
dispatch of troops. 
 
 
¶5. Sabah Guney, Hurriyet / Two people attacked 
Adana Sabah reporter Kemal Kucuk on Ataturk 
Street. A Universal Hospital spokesperson 
announced that Kucuk's nose is broken. The 
Adana Security Office is continuing its 
investigation of the incident. 
 
 
¶6. Milli Gazete / Bingol province, which was 
struck by an earthquake in May, 2003, needs 
help with the start of its new school year. 
Most schools in the area have been moved into 
prefabricated buildings and repair of the 
previous school buildings requires financial 
aid and assistance. 
 
 
ECONOMIC 
 
 
¶7. Turkiye, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Zaman / Umit 
Gumus, Head of the Adana Chamber of Industry, 
visited the International industrial fair in 
Selaniko, Greece, including the 15 stands from 
Adana.  Gumus also had meetings with the Athens 
head of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
director. 
REID