This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/SA/EX; SA/INS; DS/CIS/PSP; DS/IP/FPO AND 
DS/IP/SA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC ABLD AFIN CE
SUBJECT: INFORMAL PRESENCE IN THE NORTHERN CITY OF 
JAFFNA 
 
¶1.  With continuing progress toward peace, this Mission 
finds it highly desirable to establish an informal 
presence in the northern city of Jaffna.  This will 
facilitate coordination of AID activities in the areas 
of economic development and humanitarian assistance; 
help us carry out public diplomacy programs; and allow 
us to monitor events/activities important to US foreign 
policy objectives. 
 
¶2.  To date, Mission personnel on temporary duty to 
Jaffna have had to use the UN guest quarters, which 
still is the only lodging in town.  With UN activities 
increasing rapidly, this option is not available to us 
any longer.  Post therefore plans to lease a residential 
property for lodging by Mission staff during short 
periods of TDY.  While this property will not be used as 
a venue for official meetings, it may be used for 
occasional lunches with contacts. It will have two or 
three bedrooms, kitchen facilities, etc.  It will also 
have a telephone, fax, TV, radio and a PC.  Total 
leasing cost and operating expenses such as salary for a 
cook cum caretaker/ gardener in addition to utilities 
would be about $3,500 per year, which would be funded by 
ICASS. 
 
¶3.  The Mission will look at renting an appropriately 
secure residence.  When a property is located, RSO will 
conduct a detailed security inspection of the residence 
and approve or veto its addition to our housing pool. 
Residential security upgrades will be identified and 
reported, and the residence will meet all residential 
security standards prior to occupancy. 
 
¶4.  Post requests the Department's prompt approval and 
funding for this initiative. 
 
Wills