This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 002889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FBI FOR DIRECTOR MUELLER FROM AMBASSADOR GNEHM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL KCRM JO
SUBJECT: YOUR MAY 31 - JUNE 1 VISIT TO JORDAN 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) Director Mueller: It was a pleasure speaking with you 
last week regarding your upcoming visit to the region.  As 
you will recall, at that time I was not certain whether King 
Abdullah or GID Director Sa'ad Kheir would be in Jordan at 
the end of the month or traveling abroad.  I am happy to 
report that the Palace has just informed us that the King and 
Sa'ad, along with PSD director Tahseen Shurdom, will be in 
Amman May 31 - June 1 and available to meet with you on June 
¶1.  As we discussed, your visit will offer a timely 
opportunity to review the excellent cooperation we have with 
the Jordanians on a range of law enforcement and security 
issues and to discuss ideas for most effectively working 
together in the future. 
 
¶2. (C) I would like to extend once again an invitation for 
you to stay with me at the Residence, if that would be 
convenient.  I could accommodate one other senior member of 
your staff as well.  Due to space limitations, other members 
of your delegation would spend the night at a nearby hotel. 
Please let me know what your preferences are and we will plan 
accordingly. 
 
¶3. (C) Once again, I look forward to seeing you in Amman on 
May 31 for what I am sure will be a productive dialogue with 
the Jordanians. 
 
 
Warm Regards, 
 
 
 
Edward W. "Skip" Gnehm 
Ambassador 
GNEHM