This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002167 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2013 
TAGS: PREL PBTS MD NL OSCE
SUBJECT: OSCE: MOLDOVA HIGH-LEVEL ENVOY DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 244031 
     ¶B. USOSCE 374 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Mary E. Daly reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Due to the absence of CiO Personal Representative and 
OSCE Task Force Director Daan Everts until August 29, PolOff 
delivered ref A to OSCE Task Force Senior Policy Advisor 
Geoffrey van Leeuwen.  Van Leeuwen said the GoNL agrees that 
positions on both the Transnistrian and Moldovan sides have 
hardened in recent weeks.  The GoNL is cognizant of the 
short-time frame in which to address this issue prior to both 
the December Ministerial and the end of the Dutch CiOship. 
However, van Leeuwen opined that the Dutch are likely not yet 
ready to appoint a high-level envoy.  Daan Everts, Dutch OSCE 
PermRep de Visser, and CiO Personal Representative to Moldova 
Jacobovits met with Foreign Minister de Hoop Scheffer on 
August 22 to review options that could encourage progress. 
These included: 
 
--Asking EU HiRep Solana to travel to Moldova to meet with 
the parties, followed by trip to Moscow to pressure the 
Russians.  Van Leeuwen reports that the Dutch have spoken 
with Solana's office, and they favor such a visit.  This 
visit would be in Solana's present position, not as a 
high-level envoy. 
 
--Inviting President Voronin to the Netherlands on October 11 
for discussions surrounding the Netherlands-Moldova Euro 2004 
soccer match.  (Note:  FM De Hoop Scheffer planned to attend 
the April 2 match in Tiraspol, but declined after 14 top 
Moldovan officials, including President Voronin, were 
declared persona non grata by the Transnistrians.  End Note.) 
 
--Using FM de Hoop Scheffer's October 15 visit to Moldova for 
Council of Europe business to also address OSCE issues. 
 
--Appointing a High-level Envoy.  Van Leeuwen noted that 
Germany supports the appointment of a high-level envoy. 
 
¶2. (C) The Dutch are hopeful that Moldova will be raised 
during the Bush-Putin summit.  Van Leeuwen stated that many 
believe only Putin has the power to solve this frozen 
conflict, and a weigh-in by President Bush could encourage 
Putin to play a constructive role. 
SOBEL