This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 006068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/IPC 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR LERRION/MWU 
USDOC FOR ITA/MAC/DDEFALCO 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD KIPR TU
SUBJECT:  Proposal for a Joint Demarche with EU on 
Intellectual Property Issues (Action Request) 
 
 
Ref:  State 5808 and previous 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains an action request in para 4. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) In recent years, the USG has pressed Turkey to 
improve protection of intellectual property rights, 
particularly for pharmaceuticals manufacturers, but with 
limited results thus far.  Copyright and trademark 
holders continue to face high levels of piracy and 
counterfeiting.  U.S. pharmaceuticals companies are hurt 
by lack of data exclusivity and price discrimination 
against imported drugs.  Furthermore, there has been 
some discussion of weakening patent protection for 
pharmaceuticals (reftel). 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The EU and European companies have similar 
views on IPR problems in Turkey.  We understand that the 
European pharmaceutical association is preparing a 
sharply critical report on Turkey and may press for a 
WTO case.  Data exclusivity is a key common concern, as 
it is both a WTO and EU customs union requirement.  We 
believe that the GOT will give added weight to these 
issues to the extent that it perceives them to become a 
serious obstacle to EU accession. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Embassy proposes a joint U.S. - EU demarche to 
the Turks on IPR, specifically issues facing the 
pharmaceutical industry, and requests that Washington 
agencies provide appropriate instructions.  Edelman