This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES TIP, OTHER WOMEN'S ISSUES 
WITH MINISTER 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In an October 22 introductory meeting, the 
Ambassador told State Minister Guldal Aksit (responsible for 
women's affairs) that Turkey could serve as a model on 
women's rights for the Middle East.  He urged Turkey to 
implement recent initiatives to combat trafficking in persons 
(TIP), and to compile and release TIP-related data.  Aksit 
said the GOT is committed to combating TIP.  She said she is 
closely involved in discussions on amending elements of the 
Penal Code that discriminate against women.  Unfortunately, 
the GOT office in charge of women's issues is understaffed. 
End Summary. 
------------------------------ 
Turkey a Model for Middle East 
------------------------------ 
 
 
¶2. (U) The Ambassador told Aksit Turkey could serve as an 
example for the Middle East in the area of women's rights. 
The latest Human Development Report on the Arab states cites 
the lack of female empowerment as a major factor in the 
continued underdevelopment of the region.  The economic, 
political, artistic, and literary creativity of the Arab 
states are being stifled by the exclusion of women, among 
other factors.  As an example, the report notes that Turkey 
alone published more works of creative literature over the 
past year than the entire Arab world combined.  Aksit agreed 
Turkey has made good progress on women's issues.  While women 
in Turkey continue to be underrepresented in government, they 
comprise 25-30 percent of the workforce in areas such as law, 
architecture, and medicine.  Unlike some European 
governments, the GOT does not support the use of quotas to 
promote equality.  The goal is to provide equal opportunity 
for women.  Unfortunately, Turkey faces problems, 
particularly in the southeast, where a traditional culture 
that discriminates against women and the lingering effects of 
the PKK conflict have created a situation in which many girls 
are poorly educated. 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Ambassador: Continue Fight Against TIP 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador noted that the GOT launched a number 
of initiatives that elevated Turkey from Tier III to Tier II 
in the State Department's Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
report.  He said he would like to encourage continued 
progress against TIP.  Legislation alone is not enough -- the 
GOT will have to follow through on implementation in order to 
reach its broader goals.  Two specific actions could prove 
valuable: establishing shelters for trafficking victims, and 
conducting an information campaign to inform the public about 
TIP-related laws and the rights of TIP victims.  In addition, 
the GOT could help keep track of its progress by collecting, 
and releasing, regular TIP-related data in areas such as 
arrests, prosecutions, utilization of services, etc.  Aksit 
said the GOT is committed to combating trafficking.  The 
GOT's Directorate General on the Status and Problems of Women 
has created a new committee on TIP.  Civil society in Turkey 
is now fully engaged on the issue.  Unfortunately, the GOT 
has yet to adopt organizing legislation for the Directorate 
General, leaving the office understaffed.  Once this problem 
is resolved, the GOT should be able to make more rapid 
progress on TIP and other areas affecting women. 
 
 
------------------------ 
Penal Code to be Amended 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶4. (U) The Ambassador said some women's groups argue that 
elements of the Turkish Penal Code discriminate against women 
(Note: Controversial articles include: rape between spouses 
is not a crime; rapists and kidnappers can avoid punishment 
if they marry their victims; and punishments for rape are 
greater if the victim is married, lesser if the victim is 
single, and even lesser if the victim is single and not a 
virgin.  End Note).  Aksit said she met October 21 with 
female parliamentarians and members of the parliamentary 
Justice Committee to discuss proposed amendments to Penal 
Code articles relating to crimes against women.  She said she 
will follow the amendments closely, and periodically brief 
female MPs, to ensure that the law, once amended, no longer 
discriminates against women. 
 
 
EDELMAN