This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PREL KPAO PGOV IZ HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JUNE 26, 2003 
 
 
¶1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" 
on 6/26 entitled "U.S. Ambassador doesn't see results 
against narcos." "U.S. Ambassador Larry Palmer affirmed that 
his government, just like the rest of Hondurans, expects to 
see positive results in the fight against narco- 
trafficking." 
 
"The Ambassador stated, `We want results: drug seizures, 
arrests of narco traffickers and convictions for those 
responsible of such acts. we are deeply concerned with the 
recent rise of organized crime and narco trafficking'." 
 
"He added, `More than a year ago, the Embassy received an 
anonymous report that gives names of many people linked to 
narco-trafficking and organized crime. We'd like to see a 
thorough investigation by the Honduran authorities to find 
out whether those allegations are true or not; the Honduran 
people are entitled to know'." 
 
"Concerning the arrest of Cesar Diaz, the Honduran member of 
the Central American Parliament who was arrested in 
Nicaragua with 7 kilos of heroin, he declared `it is more 
important what comes after his apprehension. I hope the 
Honduran authorities do their best to penalize rigorously 
those responsible for narco-trafficking'." 
 
¶2. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily "La Prensa" 
on 6/26 entitled "The U.S. demands the maximum penalty for 
narcos". "U.S. Ambassador Larry Palmer sent a clear 
challenge to the Judicial branch, the police and the General 
Attorney's Office: seize more drugs and penalize drug 
traffickers with the maximum penalty." 
 
"In a press conference, Palmer affirmed, `The police and the 
General Attorney Office's are responsible for finding out 
the whereabouts of narco-traffickers. We expect positive 
results from their task'." 
 
"About the arrest of Congressman Cesar Diaz, the Ambassador 
stated that the behavior of one person can't affect the 
image of the whole country. He declared that the important 
thing is that those guilty of these crimes must be severely 
punished by law." 
 
¶3. Article in "La Tribuna" on 6/26 entitled "U.S. aid is 
only enough for their advisors". "The coordinator of 
prosecutors of the Attorney General Office, Humberto 
Palacios Moya, said that they will only keep arresting minor 
users of marijuana and cocaine if the U.S. doesn't help to 
improve their logistical structures." 
 
"Palacios affirmed, `The anti-narcotics police has only 29 
agents for the whole country, we have said this to the 
National Congress and the U.S. Embassy but their answer is 
that they have given enough money for the fight against 
drugs. what the Americans do not say is that their money 
mainly goes to the DEA advisors and other international 
organizations'." 
 
¶4. Article in "La Tribuna" on 6/26 entitled "The Attorney 
General's Office is also infiltrated". "Alfredo Landaverde, 
former Executive Director of the National Council against 
Narco Trafficking, challenged governmental authorities to 
categorically face narco-trafficking, one of the most 
dangerous branches of organized crime." 
 
"Concerning the infiltration of organized crime in the 
country's security forces, he emphatically affirmed, `many 
policemen have personally told me they are afraid of some of 
their colleagues because they know they work for criminal 
organizations. Honduras has a few good prosecutors, judges 
and policemen determined to fight against organized crime 
but beside them, we can also find infiltrated officials'." 
 
"He added, `I know they will call me once again to confirm 
those accusations. Then, I guess they will also call the 
U.S. embassy's DCM Roger Pierce for saying that as well'." 
 
¶5. Article in "La Tribuna" on 6/26 entitled "Four Colombians 
are arrested in narco plane case". "Four Colombians and two 
Hondurans were arrested and accused for being tied with the 
narco organizations operating in the region of Colon, which 
recently burned and destroyed a plane that was used to 
transport 500 kilos of cocaine, apparently from Colombia". 
 
¶6. Article in "La Prensa" on 6/26 entitled "Maduro asks the 
U.S. for help". "President Maduro stated that the fight 
against drug trafficking is much more difficult for a poor 
country like Honduras, and `that is why I'm asking the U.S. 
which has always been an extraordinary ally, to increase its 
support on this issue. this campaign requires a lot of money 
and we need the help of a big country like the U.S.'." 
 
"Maduro declared, `. the fight against drug trafficking 
demands sophisticated equipment, such as radars and special 
vehicles the country can't afford because public funds are 
used to address other priorities, such as the fight against 
crime and health and education programs'." 
 
¶7. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El Heraldo" 
on 6/26 entitled "The U.S. should aid more". "President 
Maduro stated the United States has helped, but not in the 
degree this country needs for accomplishable results. 
Ambassador Larry Palmer replied, `the Honduran public has 
the right to know and if they determine these allegations to 
be true, then we want the guilty to receive the maximum 
penalty of the law.  I won't be satisfied until all drug- 
traffickers are in jail, but it's a pretty hard fight'." 
 
"Maduro added, `Honduras needs more help because the public 
funds go towards teenage delinquency and education systems. 
money and sophisticated equipment are needed for this 
project, and the amount of money Honduras currently has is 
not enough to cover certain needs'." 
 
Palmer