This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          MARCH 18, 2003 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for March 18, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
¶2. FIRST IMMIGRANT WAVE TO TURKISH BORDER 
(Sabah/Hurriyet/Milliyet) Migration from Kerkuk 
and Mosul has begun.  During the migration 
convoys of 15 to 20 kilimeters formed. 
Approximately 10,000 people are heading towards 
the villages of Amadiya, Sersing, Batufa and 
Begova that are across from the Turkish town 
Hakkari. 
 
 
¶3. RESIDENTS IN KIZILTEPE REACT 
 (Milli Gazete)  The residents of Kiziltepe 
village reacted to Americans wanting to rent the 
state hospital. A delegation of eight Americans 
visited the hospital and gathered information 
concerning the capacity of the hospital.  It is 
reported that residents are worried that the 
hospital will no longer be able to serve them in 
case the hospital also serves Americans. 
 
 
¶4. U.S. ESTABLISHES SECOND BASE IN NUSAYBIN 
 (Milli Gazete/Evrensel/Dunya)  While preparations 
continue in Mardin and Kiziltepe, the U.S. is now 
preparing the Organized Industrial Zone in 
Nusaybin as a second "base". It is reported that 
the Zone is expected to be completed by March 23. 
The zone is a very large area, the equivalent of 
roughly six city blocks, and will include a 
helicopter landing area.  A group of Americans 
also visited the Nusaybin train station and 
gathered information from officials. 
 
 
5.NEVRUZ PREPARATIONS 
 (Evrensel/Bolge/Cumhuriyet)  Nevruz preparations 
continue across the country.  The DEHAP 
provincial organization in Urfa held a press 
conference at the Harran Hotel and announced 
celebrations will take place at the local 
fairgrounds.  In Tunceli, EMEP and DEHAP applied 
to the governorate for permission to celebrate 
Nevruz on March 21 at the town center.  Despite 
the call from the Diyarbakir governorate to have 
mutual celebrations, the civilian and official 
activities will be held separately again this 
year.  The Nevruz organization committee's 
request to include Kurdish music in the 
celebrations was turned down; consequently DEHAP, 
after getting support from non-governmental 
organizations, decided to have a separate 
celebration in Diyarbakir. 
 
 
¶6. MARDIN WORRIED AND HELPLESS 
 (Evrensel) Residents in Mardin, which is filled 
with U.S. soldiers, are worried and helpless. 
Due to the closing of the Habur border gate, the 
oil trucks are sitting idle in front of their 
owners' homes, and ever since the region has 
become the site for locating U.S. bases the 
economy has come to a halt.  Workers have lost 
jobs, and those who are hired by American firms 
to work in construction are working at minimum 
wages. 
 
 
¶7.  PRESS CENTER IN MARDIN 
 (Turkiye)  In Diyarbakir, a press center has been 
established under the governorate where 
journalists receive accreditation cards and 
bullet proof vests.  The press center is located 
at the first floor of Dedeman hotel. 
¶8.  AMERICANS ARE WEARING BULLET PROOF VESTS 
(Radikal)  The U.S. has deployed 1000 military 
vehicles in Mardin, which has become the most 
important logistic base for the U.S.  American 
soldiers have began wearing bulletproof vests in 
the past two days, which they continue to wear 
during heavy work.  This is interpreted as a sign 
that the possible war is close.  The number of 
military vehicles that have arrived from 
Iskenderun by railway to the Mardin rope factory 
has increased. 
HOLTZ