This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061439Z Nov 03UNCLAS HARARE 002209 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR JFRAZER 
AID FOR MCOPSON, MSCOTT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ELAB PGOV ZI
SUBJECT: GOZ DENIES AFL-CIO REP RENEWED WORK PERMIT 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1. (U)  The GOZ has refused to extend the work permit of 
AFL-CIO's resident representative.  The rep applied for 
renewal in July 2003, upon expiration of his previous 
annually-renewed permit.  He received four separate one-month 
extensions before being notified that no further extensions 
would be granted, and that he "should go with this letter to 
his nearest Immigration Office so that departure arrangements 
may be made."  The most recent monthly extension will expire 
on 21 November. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The rep is not particularly surprised by this 
development, noting that both of his predecessors were 
similarly denied permit renewals and were both required to 
leave Zimbabwe before their five-year assignments were 
completed.  Although he will appeal the decision, the rep 
will likely wind up his Zimbabwean residential obligations, 
and attempt to pursue remote operations from Gaborone. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Comment:  Post has suspected for some time that the 
work permit would not be renewed.  The rep's final denial and 
departure will have a negative impact on the ongoing 
operations of a key sector of civil society.  The GOZ 
continues to target labor both directly, as in the recent 
arrests of labor union leaders, and indirectly, as in this 
attack on a peripheral labor support group.  The rep's 
departure will further strain the arm's length relationship 
of Post personnel with labor contacts, many of whom are 
reluctant to appear too close to Western influences.  The 
Ambassador and visiting Congressional staff delegation raised 
our concerns over the AFL-CIO representative's status with 
Minister of Labor July Moyo several months ago and got 
evasive answers.  Given that the GOZ has periodically 
expelled AFL-CIO representatives, we believe that there is no 
realistic prospect that the USG can alter the GOZ decision in 
its current, more repressive phase at a time of negative 
USG-GOZ relations.  End comment. 
SULLIVAN