This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001632 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2008 
TAGS: PHUM PREL TU UNHRC
SUBJECT: TURKEY: 59TH COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS DEMARCHE 
 
 
REF: SECSTATE 64728 
 
 
Classified by Polcouns John Kunstadter; reasons 1.5 b and d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Poloff March 13 discussed reftel talking points with 
Kaan Esener, head of the MFA Council of Europe Department, 
and his deputy, Serhat Aksen.  Esener and Aksen noted that 
Turkey will participate as an EU candidate country in certain 
EU coordination meetings at the Commission.  They said the 
GOT looked forward to working with the USG.  In general, 
Esener said, the GOT is sensitive about "sometimes unfair" 
international criticism of its own human rights record, and 
therefore tends to favor thematic resolutions rather than 
country-specific resolutions.  However, he said, the GOT 
recognizes there is often broad support for country-specific 
resolutions and does not rule out support. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Aksen said Turkey is close to both the Western and 
Islamic Commission members, and can sometimes help bridge 
gaps.  He said the GOT shares the USG view that resolutions 
on the Arab-Israeli conflict should be balanced.  Esener said 
in the past Western Commission members have undermined their 
own good efforts by failing to consult with others on the 
Commission before introducing resolutions.  He said the GOT 
will try to prevent this from happening during the next 
session. 
 
 
PEARSON